Header array number	header array string	found match string	found match page	found match line
1	General	CONTENTS ... Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111 Committee Roster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v 1 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2 Flowmeter Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 3 Error Sources and Their Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 4 Application Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 5 Meter Factor Determination and Verification .......................... 9 Figures 1 Wetted Transducer Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2 Protected Configuration With Cavities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 3 Protected Configuration With Protrusions ............................. 4 4 Protected Configuration With Smooth Bore ............................ 4 5 Acoustic Path Configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 6 A Typical Cross Path Ultrasonic Flowmeter Configuration (Paths May Be Multipath Diametric or Chordal) ............................ 7 Appendices A Acoustic Transit Time in a Nonuniform Fluid Velocity Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 B Selection Guidelines ........................................... 14 vii Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	6	6
1.1	Scope	ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 1 GENERAL 1.1 Scope This Standard applies only to ultrasonic flowmeters that base their operation on the measurement of transit times of acoustic signals. Further, this Standard concerns only the application of such meters when used to mea- sure the volumetric flow rate of a liquid exhibiting homogeneous acoustic properties and flowing in a com- pletely fdled closed conduit. Not covered by this Standard are ultrasonic flow- meters that derive volumetric flow rate from measure- ments of the deviation, scattering (Doppler flowmeter), or correlation of acoustic signals. 1.2 Purpose This Standard provides: (a) a description of the operating principles employed (b) a description of error sources and performance (c) a common set of terminology, symbols, defini- by the ultrasonic flowmeters covered in this Standard; verification procedures; tions, and specifications. 1.3 Terminology, Symbols, and Definitions Terminology and symbols used in this Standard, except for those defined below, are in accordance with ANWASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes. acoustic path - the path that the acoustic signals follow as they propagate through the measurement section be- tween the transducer elements axid flow velocity (Vax) - the component of liquid flow velocity at a point in the measurement section that is parallel to the measurement section’s axis and in the direction of the flow being measured cross flow velocity - the component of liquid flow ve- locity at a point in the measurement section that is per- pendicular to the measurement section’s axis measurement section - the section of conduit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals. The measurement section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section and lo- cated at the extreme upstream and downstream trans- ducer positions. nonrefractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid inter- faces at a right angle refractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid interfaces at other than a right angle transducer - the combination of the transducer element and passive materials transducer element - an active component that pro- duces either acoustic output in response to an electric stimulus and/or an electric output in response to an acoustic stimulus transit time (t) - the time required for an acoustic signal to traverse an acoustic path velocity profire correction factor (S) - a dimensionless factor based on measured knowledge of the velocity pro- file used to adjust the meter output 2 FLOWMETER DESCRIPTION The transit-time ultrasonic flowmeter being con- sidered in this Standard is a complete system composed of the primary device, which is a measurement section with one or more pairs of transducers, and the secondary device, which is the electronic equipment necessary to operate the transducers, make the measurements, pro- cess the measured data, and display or record results. 1 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	7	7
1.2	Purpose	ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 1 GENERAL 1.1 Scope This Standard applies only to ultrasonic flowmeters that base their operation on the measurement of transit times of acoustic signals. Further, this Standard concerns only the application of such meters when used to mea- sure the volumetric flow rate of a liquid exhibiting homogeneous acoustic properties and flowing in a com- pletely fdled closed conduit. Not covered by this Standard are ultrasonic flow- meters that derive volumetric flow rate from measure- ments of the deviation, scattering (Doppler flowmeter), or correlation of acoustic signals. 1.2 Purpose This Standard provides: (a) a description of the operating principles employed (b) a description of error sources and performance (c) a common set of terminology, symbols, defini- by the ultrasonic flowmeters covered in this Standard; verification procedures; tions, and specifications. 1.3 Terminology, Symbols, and Definitions Terminology and symbols used in this Standard, except for those defined below, are in accordance with ANWASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes. acoustic path - the path that the acoustic signals follow as they propagate through the measurement section be- tween the transducer elements axid flow velocity (Vax) - the component of liquid flow velocity at a point in the measurement section that is parallel to the measurement section’s axis and in the direction of the flow being measured cross flow velocity - the component of liquid flow ve- locity at a point in the measurement section that is per- pendicular to the measurement section’s axis measurement section - the section of conduit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals. The measurement section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section and lo- cated at the extreme upstream and downstream trans- ducer positions. nonrefractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid inter- faces at a right angle refractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid interfaces at other than a right angle transducer - the combination of the transducer element and passive materials transducer element - an active component that pro- duces either acoustic output in response to an electric stimulus and/or an electric output in response to an acoustic stimulus transit time (t) - the time required for an acoustic signal to traverse an acoustic path velocity profire correction factor (S) - a dimensionless factor based on measured knowledge of the velocity pro- file used to adjust the meter output 2 FLOWMETER DESCRIPTION The transit-time ultrasonic flowmeter being con- sidered in this Standard is a complete system composed of the primary device, which is a measurement section with one or more pairs of transducers, and the secondary device, which is the electronic equipment necessary to operate the transducers, make the measurements, pro- cess the measured data, and display or record results. 1 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	7	7
1.3	Terminology, Symbols, and Definitions	ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 1 GENERAL 1.1 Scope This Standard applies only to ultrasonic flowmeters that base their operation on the measurement of transit times of acoustic signals. Further, this Standard concerns only the application of such meters when used to mea- sure the volumetric flow rate of a liquid exhibiting homogeneous acoustic properties and flowing in a com- pletely fdled closed conduit. Not covered by this Standard are ultrasonic flow- meters that derive volumetric flow rate from measure- ments of the deviation, scattering (Doppler flowmeter), or correlation of acoustic signals. 1.2 Purpose This Standard provides: (a) a description of the operating principles employed (b) a description of error sources and performance (c) a common set of terminology, symbols, defini- by the ultrasonic flowmeters covered in this Standard; verification procedures; tions, and specifications. 1.3 Terminology, Symbols, and Definitions Terminology and symbols used in this Standard, except for those defined below, are in accordance with ANWASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes. acoustic path - the path that the acoustic signals follow as they propagate through the measurement section be- tween the transducer elements axid flow velocity (Vax) - the component of liquid flow velocity at a point in the measurement section that is parallel to the measurement section’s axis and in the direction of the flow being measured cross flow velocity - the component of liquid flow ve- locity at a point in the measurement section that is per- pendicular to the measurement section’s axis measurement section - the section of conduit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals. The measurement section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section and lo- cated at the extreme upstream and downstream trans- ducer positions. nonrefractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid inter- faces at a right angle refractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid interfaces at other than a right angle transducer - the combination of the transducer element and passive materials transducer element - an active component that pro- duces either acoustic output in response to an electric stimulus and/or an electric output in response to an acoustic stimulus transit time (t) - the time required for an acoustic signal to traverse an acoustic path velocity profire correction factor (S) - a dimensionless factor based on measured knowledge of the velocity pro- file used to adjust the meter output 2 FLOWMETER DESCRIPTION The transit-time ultrasonic flowmeter being con- sidered in this Standard is a complete system composed of the primary device, which is a measurement section with one or more pairs of transducers, and the secondary device, which is the electronic equipment necessary to operate the transducers, make the measurements, pro- cess the measured data, and display or record results. 1 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	7	7
2	Flowmeter Description	CONTENTS ... Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111 Committee Roster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v 1 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2 Flowmeter Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 3 Error Sources and Their Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 4 Application Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 5 Meter Factor Determination and Verification .......................... 9 Figures 1 Wetted Transducer Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2 Protected Configuration With Cavities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 3 Protected Configuration With Protrusions ............................. 4 4 Protected Configuration With Smooth Bore ............................ 4 5 Acoustic Path Configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 6 A Typical Cross Path Ultrasonic Flowmeter Configuration (Paths May Be Multipath Diametric or Chordal) ............................ 7 Appendices A Acoustic Transit Time in a Nonuniform Fluid Velocity Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 B Selection Guidelines ........................................... 14 vii Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	6	6
2.1	Operating Principles	ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 1 GENERAL 1.1 Scope This Standard applies only to ultrasonic flowmeters that base their operation on the measurement of transit times of acoustic signals. Further, this Standard concerns only the application of such meters when used to mea- sure the volumetric flow rate of a liquid exhibiting homogeneous acoustic properties and flowing in a com- pletely fdled closed conduit. Not covered by this Standard are ultrasonic flow- meters that derive volumetric flow rate from measure- ments of the deviation, scattering (Doppler flowmeter), or correlation of acoustic signals. 1.2 Purpose This Standard provides: (a) a description of the operating principles employed (b) a description of error sources and performance (c) a common set of terminology, symbols, defini- by the ultrasonic flowmeters covered in this Standard; verification procedures; tions, and specifications. 1.3 Terminology, Symbols, and Definitions Terminology and symbols used in this Standard, except for those defined below, are in accordance with ANWASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes. acoustic path - the path that the acoustic signals follow as they propagate through the measurement section be- tween the transducer elements axid flow velocity (Vax) - the component of liquid flow velocity at a point in the measurement section that is parallel to the measurement section’s axis and in the direction of the flow being measured cross flow velocity - the component of liquid flow ve- locity at a point in the measurement section that is per- pendicular to the measurement section’s axis measurement section - the section of conduit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals. The measurement section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section and lo- cated at the extreme upstream and downstream trans- ducer positions. nonrefractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid inter- faces at a right angle refractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid interfaces at other than a right angle transducer - the combination of the transducer element and passive materials transducer element - an active component that pro- duces either acoustic output in response to an electric stimulus and/or an electric output in response to an acoustic stimulus transit time (t) - the time required for an acoustic signal to traverse an acoustic path velocity profire correction factor (S) - a dimensionless factor based on measured knowledge of the velocity pro- file used to adjust the meter output 2 FLOWMETER DESCRIPTION The transit-time ultrasonic flowmeter being con- sidered in this Standard is a complete system composed of the primary device, which is a measurement section with one or more pairs of transducers, and the secondary device, which is the electronic equipment necessary to operate the transducers, make the measurements, pro- cess the measured data, and display or record results. 1 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	7	7
2.1.1	Introduction	ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 2.1 Operating Principles 2.1.1 Introduction. At any given instant, the differ- ence between the apparent speed of sound in a moving liquid and the speed of sound in that same liquid at rest is directly proportional to the liquid’s instantaneous velocity. As a consequence, a measure of the average velocity of the liquid along a path can be obtained by transmitting an acoustic pulse along the path and sub- sequently measuring its transit time. The volumetric flow rate of a liquid flowing in a com- pletely filled closed conduit is defined as the average velocity of the liquid over a cross section multiplied by the area of the cross section. Thus, by measuring the average velocity of a liquid along one or more acoustic paths and combining the measurements with knowledge of the cross-sectional area and the velocity profile over the cross section, it is possible to obtain an estimate of the volumetric flow rate of the liquid in the conduit. The theoretical considerations involved in implement- ing these concepts is the subject of this section. 2.1.2 Fluid Velocity Measurement. Several techniques can be used to obtain a measure of the average effective speed of propagation of an acoustic pulse in a moving liquid in-order to determine the average axial flow ve- locity (V,) along an acoustic path. Two approaches, transit-time difference and frequency difference, will be discussed here. 2.1.2.1 Transit-Time Difference. The basis of this technique is the direct measurement of the transit time of acoustic signals as they propagate between a trans- mitter and a receiver, both of which are assumed (see para. 2.1.3) to be in direct contact with the liquid. Dif- ferent transmitter/receiver arrangements are described in para. 2.1.3 below. For an acoustic signal traveling up- stream, the apparent sound speed at any point along the line of transmission, assuming only axial flow, is where C, is the speed of sound in the liquid at rest, 6 is the angle between the acoustic path and V,, and V, is the axial flow velocity at the point in question (see Fig. 1). For a downstream pulse, In the ideal case of plug flow, V,, is constant through- out the liquid and the acoustic path is a straight line, i.e., 0 = constant = 8, (path angle for fluid at rest). MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Consequently, Cup and CdO- are both constants along the acoustic path. In this case the upstream and down- stream transit times(tup, tdo-) are given respectively by: tup = (3) c, ++ - v, cos eo and (4) sin’ e, + V , cos e, where 1, is the straight line distance between the centers of the faces of the acoustic transmitter and receiver. Taking the difference between the reciprocals of these transit times leads to 1 1 2va, cos e, - tdown tup IO and, on rearranging, to where At = tup - tdown. Since v,, is constant, v, = v,, (the average flow velocity). This analysis becomes more complicated in the ab- sence of plug flow. Nevertheless, to the degree that (Vax/Co)&ax. << 1, the result for the average of the axial liquid velocity along the acoustic path (v,) is identical (see Appendix A), i.e., - 2.1.2.2 Frequency Difference. In a frequency differ- ence measurement approach, the reception of an acous- tic signal at the receiver is used as a reference for gener- ating a subsequent acoustic signal at the transmitter. Assuming no delays other than the propagation time of the acoustic pulses in the liquid, the frequency at which the pulses are generated or received is proportional to the reciprocal of their transit time. The equations derived in the previous paragraph are equally valid in this case, the 2 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	8	8
2.1.2	Fluid Velocity Measurement	ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 2.1 Operating Principles 2.1.1 Introduction. At any given instant, the differ- ence between the apparent speed of sound in a moving liquid and the speed of sound in that same liquid at rest is directly proportional to the liquid’s instantaneous velocity. As a consequence, a measure of the average velocity of the liquid along a path can be obtained by transmitting an acoustic pulse along the path and sub- sequently measuring its transit time. The volumetric flow rate of a liquid flowing in a com- pletely filled closed conduit is defined as the average velocity of the liquid over a cross section multiplied by the area of the cross section. Thus, by measuring the average velocity of a liquid along one or more acoustic paths and combining the measurements with knowledge of the cross-sectional area and the velocity profile over the cross section, it is possible to obtain an estimate of the volumetric flow rate of the liquid in the conduit. The theoretical considerations involved in implement- ing these concepts is the subject of this section. 2.1.2 Fluid Velocity Measurement. Several techniques can be used to obtain a measure of the average effective speed of propagation of an acoustic pulse in a moving liquid in-order to determine the average axial flow ve- locity (V,) along an acoustic path. Two approaches, transit-time difference and frequency difference, will be discussed here. 2.1.2.1 Transit-Time Difference. The basis of this technique is the direct measurement of the transit time of acoustic signals as they propagate between a trans- mitter and a receiver, both of which are assumed (see para. 2.1.3) to be in direct contact with the liquid. Dif- ferent transmitter/receiver arrangements are described in para. 2.1.3 below. For an acoustic signal traveling up- stream, the apparent sound speed at any point along the line of transmission, assuming only axial flow, is where C, is the speed of sound in the liquid at rest, 6 is the angle between the acoustic path and V,, and V, is the axial flow velocity at the point in question (see Fig. 1). For a downstream pulse, In the ideal case of plug flow, V,, is constant through- out the liquid and the acoustic path is a straight line, i.e., 0 = constant = 8, (path angle for fluid at rest). MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Consequently, Cup and CdO- are both constants along the acoustic path. In this case the upstream and down- stream transit times(tup, tdo-) are given respectively by: tup = (3) c, ++ - v, cos eo and (4) sin’ e, + V , cos e, where 1, is the straight line distance between the centers of the faces of the acoustic transmitter and receiver. Taking the difference between the reciprocals of these transit times leads to 1 1 2va, cos e, - tdown tup IO and, on rearranging, to where At = tup - tdown. Since v,, is constant, v, = v,, (the average flow velocity). This analysis becomes more complicated in the ab- sence of plug flow. Nevertheless, to the degree that (Vax/Co)&ax. << 1, the result for the average of the axial liquid velocity along the acoustic path (v,) is identical (see Appendix A), i.e., - 2.1.2.2 Frequency Difference. In a frequency differ- ence measurement approach, the reception of an acous- tic signal at the receiver is used as a reference for gener- ating a subsequent acoustic signal at the transmitter. Assuming no delays other than the propagation time of the acoustic pulses in the liquid, the frequency at which the pulses are generated or received is proportional to the reciprocal of their transit time. The equations derived in the previous paragraph are equally valid in this case, the 2 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	8	8
2.1.2.1	Transit-Time Difference	ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 2.1 Operating Principles 2.1.1 Introduction. At any given instant, the differ- ence between the apparent speed of sound in a moving liquid and the speed of sound in that same liquid at rest is directly proportional to the liquid’s instantaneous velocity. As a consequence, a measure of the average velocity of the liquid along a path can be obtained by transmitting an acoustic pulse along the path and sub- sequently measuring its transit time. The volumetric flow rate of a liquid flowing in a com- pletely filled closed conduit is defined as the average velocity of the liquid over a cross section multiplied by the area of the cross section. Thus, by measuring the average velocity of a liquid along one or more acoustic paths and combining the measurements with knowledge of the cross-sectional area and the velocity profile over the cross section, it is possible to obtain an estimate of the volumetric flow rate of the liquid in the conduit. The theoretical considerations involved in implement- ing these concepts is the subject of this section. 2.1.2 Fluid Velocity Measurement. Several techniques can be used to obtain a measure of the average effective speed of propagation of an acoustic pulse in a moving liquid in-order to determine the average axial flow ve- locity (V,) along an acoustic path. Two approaches, transit-time difference and frequency difference, will be discussed here. 2.1.2.1 Transit-Time Difference. The basis of this technique is the direct measurement of the transit time of acoustic signals as they propagate between a trans- mitter and a receiver, both of which are assumed (see para. 2.1.3) to be in direct contact with the liquid. Dif- ferent transmitter/receiver arrangements are described in para. 2.1.3 below. For an acoustic signal traveling up- stream, the apparent sound speed at any point along the line of transmission, assuming only axial flow, is where C, is the speed of sound in the liquid at rest, 6 is the angle between the acoustic path and V,, and V, is the axial flow velocity at the point in question (see Fig. 1). For a downstream pulse, In the ideal case of plug flow, V,, is constant through- out the liquid and the acoustic path is a straight line, i.e., 0 = constant = 8, (path angle for fluid at rest). MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Consequently, Cup and CdO- are both constants along the acoustic path. In this case the upstream and down- stream transit times(tup, tdo-) are given respectively by: tup = (3) c, ++ - v, cos eo and (4) sin’ e, + V , cos e, where 1, is the straight line distance between the centers of the faces of the acoustic transmitter and receiver. Taking the difference between the reciprocals of these transit times leads to 1 1 2va, cos e, - tdown tup IO and, on rearranging, to where At = tup - tdown. Since v,, is constant, v, = v,, (the average flow velocity). This analysis becomes more complicated in the ab- sence of plug flow. Nevertheless, to the degree that (Vax/Co)&ax. << 1, the result for the average of the axial liquid velocity along the acoustic path (v,) is identical (see Appendix A), i.e., - 2.1.2.2 Frequency Difference. In a frequency differ- ence measurement approach, the reception of an acous- tic signal at the receiver is used as a reference for gener- ating a subsequent acoustic signal at the transmitter. Assuming no delays other than the propagation time of the acoustic pulses in the liquid, the frequency at which the pulses are generated or received is proportional to the reciprocal of their transit time. The equations derived in the previous paragraph are equally valid in this case, the 2 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	8	8
2.1.2.2	Frequency Difference	ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 2.1 Operating Principles 2.1.1 Introduction. At any given instant, the differ- ence between the apparent speed of sound in a moving liquid and the speed of sound in that same liquid at rest is directly proportional to the liquid’s instantaneous velocity. As a consequence, a measure of the average velocity of the liquid along a path can be obtained by transmitting an acoustic pulse along the path and sub- sequently measuring its transit time. The volumetric flow rate of a liquid flowing in a com- pletely filled closed conduit is defined as the average velocity of the liquid over a cross section multiplied by the area of the cross section. Thus, by measuring the average velocity of a liquid along one or more acoustic paths and combining the measurements with knowledge of the cross-sectional area and the velocity profile over the cross section, it is possible to obtain an estimate of the volumetric flow rate of the liquid in the conduit. The theoretical considerations involved in implement- ing these concepts is the subject of this section. 2.1.2 Fluid Velocity Measurement. Several techniques can be used to obtain a measure of the average effective speed of propagation of an acoustic pulse in a moving liquid in-order to determine the average axial flow ve- locity (V,) along an acoustic path. Two approaches, transit-time difference and frequency difference, will be discussed here. 2.1.2.1 Transit-Time Difference. The basis of this technique is the direct measurement of the transit time of acoustic signals as they propagate between a trans- mitter and a receiver, both of which are assumed (see para. 2.1.3) to be in direct contact with the liquid. Dif- ferent transmitter/receiver arrangements are described in para. 2.1.3 below. For an acoustic signal traveling up- stream, the apparent sound speed at any point along the line of transmission, assuming only axial flow, is where C, is the speed of sound in the liquid at rest, 6 is the angle between the acoustic path and V,, and V, is the axial flow velocity at the point in question (see Fig. 1). For a downstream pulse, In the ideal case of plug flow, V,, is constant through- out the liquid and the acoustic path is a straight line, i.e., 0 = constant = 8, (path angle for fluid at rest). MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Consequently, Cup and CdO- are both constants along the acoustic path. In this case the upstream and down- stream transit times(tup, tdo-) are given respectively by: tup = (3) c, ++ - v, cos eo and (4) sin’ e, + V , cos e, where 1, is the straight line distance between the centers of the faces of the acoustic transmitter and receiver. Taking the difference between the reciprocals of these transit times leads to 1 1 2va, cos e, - tdown tup IO and, on rearranging, to where At = tup - tdown. Since v,, is constant, v, = v,, (the average flow velocity). This analysis becomes more complicated in the ab- sence of plug flow. Nevertheless, to the degree that (Vax/Co)&ax. << 1, the result for the average of the axial liquid velocity along the acoustic path (v,) is identical (see Appendix A), i.e., - 2.1.2.2 Frequency Difference. In a frequency differ- ence measurement approach, the reception of an acous- tic signal at the receiver is used as a reference for gener- ating a subsequent acoustic signal at the transmitter. Assuming no delays other than the propagation time of the acoustic pulses in the liquid, the frequency at which the pulses are generated or received is proportional to the reciprocal of their transit time. The equations derived in the previous paragraph are equally valid in this case, the 2 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	8	8
2.1.3	Transducer Considerations	MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD transit time being replaced by the reciprocal of a con- 2.1.4 Estimating Volumetric Flow. Once the average stant (Kf) times the frequencies, i.e., axial flow velocity along an acoustic path has been found, the volumetric flow rate can be calculated from - Kf 10 the following equation: v, = (fdown - fup) (6) 2 cos eo n 2.1.3 Transducer Considerations. In the preceding paragraph it was assumed that the transducer element was in direct contact with the liquid and that the acous- tic signal was propagated normal to the transducer/liquid interface. In most’ cases it is desirable to protect the transducer element from the process liquid by using in- tervening materials (see Figs. 2 and 3). If such an ar- rangement is employed, Eq. (5) takes the following form: where to, a function of temperature, is the transit time of the acoustic signals in the intervening materials. The equation appropriate to the frequency difference technique must also be modified: where fo is equal to 1 /to. Use of an intervening material also allows the possibil- ity of acoustic signals entering and leaving the liquid along a path that is not normal to the solid/liquid inter- face. For example, the intervening material could be flush with the inside surface of the conduit as in Fig. 4. This further complicates the acoustic analysis.since not only the corrections mentioned above, but also correc- tions for the refraction of the acoustic signals at the solid/liquid interface must be introduced. This refraction takes place according to Snell’s Law, i.e., where C is the sound speed in the liquid and Cp is the sound speed in the intervening material. As a conse- quence, 0 and to (f,) in Eqs. (7) and (8) now become functions of the sound speeds (C, Cp), and hence, in gen- eral, of the temperature, pressure, and composition of the process fluid and intervening materials. where: A = the average cross-sectional area of the measure- ment section (L*) Q = the volumetric flow rate in the measurement section (L3/t) S = a velocity profile correction factor (dimension- less) v,i = the average axial flow velocity along acoustic path i(L/t) Wi = a weighting factor for acoustic path i that is de- pendent on measurement section geometry and acoustic path location (dimensionless) Note that increasing n can reduce the sensitivity of S to flow profiie variations. n = the number of acoustic paths 2.2 Implementation 2.2.1 Primary Device. The primary device consists of a separate spool piece with transducers installed, or an existing section of conduit to which transducers are in- stalled in the field. 2.2.1.1 Measurement Section. The section of con- duit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals is called the measurement section. This section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section located at the extreme up- stream and downstream transducer positions. The mea- surement section is usually circular in cross section; how- ever, it may be square, rectangular, elliptical, or some other shape. 2.2.1.2 Transducers. The transducers transmit and receive acoustic energy. They may be factory rtlounted or field mounted by clamping, threading, or bonding. Transducers may be wetted by the liquid or be non- wetted. Wetted transducers may be flush mounted, re- cessed, or protrude into the flow stream. Some non- wetted transducers may be removed while the line is in service. 2.2.1.3 Acoustic Paths. There may be one (single path) or more (multipath) acoustic paths in the measure- ment section, each having a pair of transducers. Common 3 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Upstream transducer element Downstream transducer element I I MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Intervening material \ \ \ I Measurement I section FIG. 3 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH PROTRUSIONS FIG. 1 WETTED TRANSDUCER CONFIGURATION Intervening material '\ \ Intervening material L?\ FIG. 2 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH FIG. 4 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH CAVITIES SMOOTH BORE 4 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	9	9
2.1.4	Estimating Volumetric Flow	MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD transit time being replaced by the reciprocal of a con- 2.1.4 Estimating Volumetric Flow. Once the average stant (Kf) times the frequencies, i.e., axial flow velocity along an acoustic path has been found, the volumetric flow rate can be calculated from - Kf 10 the following equation: v, = (fdown - fup) (6) 2 cos eo n 2.1.3 Transducer Considerations. In the preceding paragraph it was assumed that the transducer element was in direct contact with the liquid and that the acous- tic signal was propagated normal to the transducer/liquid interface. In most’ cases it is desirable to protect the transducer element from the process liquid by using in- tervening materials (see Figs. 2 and 3). If such an ar- rangement is employed, Eq. (5) takes the following form: where to, a function of temperature, is the transit time of the acoustic signals in the intervening materials. The equation appropriate to the frequency difference technique must also be modified: where fo is equal to 1 /to. Use of an intervening material also allows the possibil- ity of acoustic signals entering and leaving the liquid along a path that is not normal to the solid/liquid inter- face. For example, the intervening material could be flush with the inside surface of the conduit as in Fig. 4. This further complicates the acoustic analysis.since not only the corrections mentioned above, but also correc- tions for the refraction of the acoustic signals at the solid/liquid interface must be introduced. This refraction takes place according to Snell’s Law, i.e., where C is the sound speed in the liquid and Cp is the sound speed in the intervening material. As a conse- quence, 0 and to (f,) in Eqs. (7) and (8) now become functions of the sound speeds (C, Cp), and hence, in gen- eral, of the temperature, pressure, and composition of the process fluid and intervening materials. where: A = the average cross-sectional area of the measure- ment section (L*) Q = the volumetric flow rate in the measurement section (L3/t) S = a velocity profile correction factor (dimension- less) v,i = the average axial flow velocity along acoustic path i(L/t) Wi = a weighting factor for acoustic path i that is de- pendent on measurement section geometry and acoustic path location (dimensionless) Note that increasing n can reduce the sensitivity of S to flow profiie variations. n = the number of acoustic paths 2.2 Implementation 2.2.1 Primary Device. The primary device consists of a separate spool piece with transducers installed, or an existing section of conduit to which transducers are in- stalled in the field. 2.2.1.1 Measurement Section. The section of con- duit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals is called the measurement section. This section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section located at the extreme up- stream and downstream transducer positions. The mea- surement section is usually circular in cross section; how- ever, it may be square, rectangular, elliptical, or some other shape. 2.2.1.2 Transducers. The transducers transmit and receive acoustic energy. They may be factory rtlounted or field mounted by clamping, threading, or bonding. Transducers may be wetted by the liquid or be non- wetted. Wetted transducers may be flush mounted, re- cessed, or protrude into the flow stream. Some non- wetted transducers may be removed while the line is in service. 2.2.1.3 Acoustic Paths. There may be one (single path) or more (multipath) acoustic paths in the measure- ment section, each having a pair of transducers. Common 3 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Upstream transducer element Downstream transducer element I I MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Intervening material \ \ \ I Measurement I section FIG. 3 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH PROTRUSIONS FIG. 1 WETTED TRANSDUCER CONFIGURATION Intervening material '\ \ Intervening material L?\ FIG. 2 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH FIG. 4 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH CAVITIES SMOOTH BORE 4 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	9	9
2.2	Implementation	MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD transit time being replaced by the reciprocal of a con- 2.1.4 Estimating Volumetric Flow. Once the average stant (Kf) times the frequencies, i.e., axial flow velocity along an acoustic path has been found, the volumetric flow rate can be calculated from - Kf 10 the following equation: v, = (fdown - fup) (6) 2 cos eo n 2.1.3 Transducer Considerations. In the preceding paragraph it was assumed that the transducer element was in direct contact with the liquid and that the acous- tic signal was propagated normal to the transducer/liquid interface. In most’ cases it is desirable to protect the transducer element from the process liquid by using in- tervening materials (see Figs. 2 and 3). If such an ar- rangement is employed, Eq. (5) takes the following form: where to, a function of temperature, is the transit time of the acoustic signals in the intervening materials. The equation appropriate to the frequency difference technique must also be modified: where fo is equal to 1 /to. Use of an intervening material also allows the possibil- ity of acoustic signals entering and leaving the liquid along a path that is not normal to the solid/liquid inter- face. For example, the intervening material could be flush with the inside surface of the conduit as in Fig. 4. This further complicates the acoustic analysis.since not only the corrections mentioned above, but also correc- tions for the refraction of the acoustic signals at the solid/liquid interface must be introduced. This refraction takes place according to Snell’s Law, i.e., where C is the sound speed in the liquid and Cp is the sound speed in the intervening material. As a conse- quence, 0 and to (f,) in Eqs. (7) and (8) now become functions of the sound speeds (C, Cp), and hence, in gen- eral, of the temperature, pressure, and composition of the process fluid and intervening materials. where: A = the average cross-sectional area of the measure- ment section (L*) Q = the volumetric flow rate in the measurement section (L3/t) S = a velocity profile correction factor (dimension- less) v,i = the average axial flow velocity along acoustic path i(L/t) Wi = a weighting factor for acoustic path i that is de- pendent on measurement section geometry and acoustic path location (dimensionless) Note that increasing n can reduce the sensitivity of S to flow profiie variations. n = the number of acoustic paths 2.2 Implementation 2.2.1 Primary Device. The primary device consists of a separate spool piece with transducers installed, or an existing section of conduit to which transducers are in- stalled in the field. 2.2.1.1 Measurement Section. The section of con- duit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals is called the measurement section. This section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section located at the extreme up- stream and downstream transducer positions. The mea- surement section is usually circular in cross section; how- ever, it may be square, rectangular, elliptical, or some other shape. 2.2.1.2 Transducers. The transducers transmit and receive acoustic energy. They may be factory rtlounted or field mounted by clamping, threading, or bonding. Transducers may be wetted by the liquid or be non- wetted. Wetted transducers may be flush mounted, re- cessed, or protrude into the flow stream. Some non- wetted transducers may be removed while the line is in service. 2.2.1.3 Acoustic Paths. There may be one (single path) or more (multipath) acoustic paths in the measure- ment section, each having a pair of transducers. Common 3 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Upstream transducer element Downstream transducer element I I MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Intervening material \ \ \ I Measurement I section FIG. 3 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH PROTRUSIONS FIG. 1 WETTED TRANSDUCER CONFIGURATION Intervening material '\ \ Intervening material L?\ FIG. 2 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH FIG. 4 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH CAVITIES SMOOTH BORE 4 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	9	9
2.2.1	Primary Device	ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 1 GENERAL 1.1 Scope This Standard applies only to ultrasonic flowmeters that base their operation on the measurement of transit times of acoustic signals. Further, this Standard concerns only the application of such meters when used to mea- sure the volumetric flow rate of a liquid exhibiting homogeneous acoustic properties and flowing in a com- pletely fdled closed conduit. Not covered by this Standard are ultrasonic flow- meters that derive volumetric flow rate from measure- ments of the deviation, scattering (Doppler flowmeter), or correlation of acoustic signals. 1.2 Purpose This Standard provides: (a) a description of the operating principles employed (b) a description of error sources and performance (c) a common set of terminology, symbols, defini- by the ultrasonic flowmeters covered in this Standard; verification procedures; tions, and specifications. 1.3 Terminology, Symbols, and Definitions Terminology and symbols used in this Standard, except for those defined below, are in accordance with ANWASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes. acoustic path - the path that the acoustic signals follow as they propagate through the measurement section be- tween the transducer elements axid flow velocity (Vax) - the component of liquid flow velocity at a point in the measurement section that is parallel to the measurement section’s axis and in the direction of the flow being measured cross flow velocity - the component of liquid flow ve- locity at a point in the measurement section that is per- pendicular to the measurement section’s axis measurement section - the section of conduit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals. The measurement section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section and lo- cated at the extreme upstream and downstream trans- ducer positions. nonrefractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid inter- faces at a right angle refractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid interfaces at other than a right angle transducer - the combination of the transducer element and passive materials transducer element - an active component that pro- duces either acoustic output in response to an electric stimulus and/or an electric output in response to an acoustic stimulus transit time (t) - the time required for an acoustic signal to traverse an acoustic path velocity profire correction factor (S) - a dimensionless factor based on measured knowledge of the velocity pro- file used to adjust the meter output 2 FLOWMETER DESCRIPTION The transit-time ultrasonic flowmeter being con- sidered in this Standard is a complete system composed of the primary device, which is a measurement section with one or more pairs of transducers, and the secondary device, which is the electronic equipment necessary to operate the transducers, make the measurements, pro- cess the measured data, and display or record results. 1 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	7	7
2.2.1.1	Measurement Section	ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 1 GENERAL 1.1 Scope This Standard applies only to ultrasonic flowmeters that base their operation on the measurement of transit times of acoustic signals. Further, this Standard concerns only the application of such meters when used to mea- sure the volumetric flow rate of a liquid exhibiting homogeneous acoustic properties and flowing in a com- pletely fdled closed conduit. Not covered by this Standard are ultrasonic flow- meters that derive volumetric flow rate from measure- ments of the deviation, scattering (Doppler flowmeter), or correlation of acoustic signals. 1.2 Purpose This Standard provides: (a) a description of the operating principles employed (b) a description of error sources and performance (c) a common set of terminology, symbols, defini- by the ultrasonic flowmeters covered in this Standard; verification procedures; tions, and specifications. 1.3 Terminology, Symbols, and Definitions Terminology and symbols used in this Standard, except for those defined below, are in accordance with ANWASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes. acoustic path - the path that the acoustic signals follow as they propagate through the measurement section be- tween the transducer elements axid flow velocity (Vax) - the component of liquid flow velocity at a point in the measurement section that is parallel to the measurement section’s axis and in the direction of the flow being measured cross flow velocity - the component of liquid flow ve- locity at a point in the measurement section that is per- pendicular to the measurement section’s axis measurement section - the section of conduit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals. The measurement section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section and lo- cated at the extreme upstream and downstream trans- ducer positions. nonrefractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid inter- faces at a right angle refractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid interfaces at other than a right angle transducer - the combination of the transducer element and passive materials transducer element - an active component that pro- duces either acoustic output in response to an electric stimulus and/or an electric output in response to an acoustic stimulus transit time (t) - the time required for an acoustic signal to traverse an acoustic path velocity profire correction factor (S) - a dimensionless factor based on measured knowledge of the velocity pro- file used to adjust the meter output 2 FLOWMETER DESCRIPTION The transit-time ultrasonic flowmeter being con- sidered in this Standard is a complete system composed of the primary device, which is a measurement section with one or more pairs of transducers, and the secondary device, which is the electronic equipment necessary to operate the transducers, make the measurements, pro- cess the measured data, and display or record results. 1 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	7	7
2.2.1.2	Transducers	SUBCOMMITTEE 9 - ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS R. G. Teyssandier, Chairman, Daniel Industries, Inc., Houston, Texas R. W. Burdett, Kennecott Minerals Co., Salt Lake City, Utah C. G. Clyde, Utah State University, Logan, Utah G. P. Corpron, Rosemount Inc., Eden Prairie, Minnesota L. D. DiNapoli, Leeds & Northrup Co., North Wales, Pennsylvania D. J. Grant, NASA, Greenbelt, Maryland D. Halrni, D. Halmi & Associates Inc., Pawtucket, Rhode Island R. E. Johnson, BC Hydro & Power Authorities, Surrey, British Columbia, Canada L. J. Kernp, Palos Verdes Estates, California R. B. Kirnball, Technical Sales Development Co., San Francisco, California F. C. Lowell, Ferranti ORE Inc., Falmouth, Massachusetts L. C. Neale, Jefferson, Massachusetts P. H. Nelson, Bureau of Reclamation, Denver, Colorado W. E. VanOver. Transducers Inc., Cerritos, California J. H. Vignos, The Foxboro Co., Foxboro, Massachusetts E. M. Zacharias, Jr., MAPCO Controls Co., Tulsa, Oklahoma vi Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	5	5
2.2.1.3	Acoustic Paths	ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 2.1 Operating Principles 2.1.1 Introduction. At any given instant, the differ- ence between the apparent speed of sound in a moving liquid and the speed of sound in that same liquid at rest is directly proportional to the liquid’s instantaneous velocity. As a consequence, a measure of the average velocity of the liquid along a path can be obtained by transmitting an acoustic pulse along the path and sub- sequently measuring its transit time. The volumetric flow rate of a liquid flowing in a com- pletely filled closed conduit is defined as the average velocity of the liquid over a cross section multiplied by the area of the cross section. Thus, by measuring the average velocity of a liquid along one or more acoustic paths and combining the measurements with knowledge of the cross-sectional area and the velocity profile over the cross section, it is possible to obtain an estimate of the volumetric flow rate of the liquid in the conduit. The theoretical considerations involved in implement- ing these concepts is the subject of this section. 2.1.2 Fluid Velocity Measurement. Several techniques can be used to obtain a measure of the average effective speed of propagation of an acoustic pulse in a moving liquid in-order to determine the average axial flow ve- locity (V,) along an acoustic path. Two approaches, transit-time difference and frequency difference, will be discussed here. 2.1.2.1 Transit-Time Difference. The basis of this technique is the direct measurement of the transit time of acoustic signals as they propagate between a trans- mitter and a receiver, both of which are assumed (see para. 2.1.3) to be in direct contact with the liquid. Dif- ferent transmitter/receiver arrangements are described in para. 2.1.3 below. For an acoustic signal traveling up- stream, the apparent sound speed at any point along the line of transmission, assuming only axial flow, is where C, is the speed of sound in the liquid at rest, 6 is the angle between the acoustic path and V,, and V, is the axial flow velocity at the point in question (see Fig. 1). For a downstream pulse, In the ideal case of plug flow, V,, is constant through- out the liquid and the acoustic path is a straight line, i.e., 0 = constant = 8, (path angle for fluid at rest). MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Consequently, Cup and CdO- are both constants along the acoustic path. In this case the upstream and down- stream transit times(tup, tdo-) are given respectively by: tup = (3) c, ++ - v, cos eo and (4) sin’ e, + V , cos e, where 1, is the straight line distance between the centers of the faces of the acoustic transmitter and receiver. Taking the difference between the reciprocals of these transit times leads to 1 1 2va, cos e, - tdown tup IO and, on rearranging, to where At = tup - tdown. Since v,, is constant, v, = v,, (the average flow velocity). This analysis becomes more complicated in the ab- sence of plug flow. Nevertheless, to the degree that (Vax/Co)&ax. << 1, the result for the average of the axial liquid velocity along the acoustic path (v,) is identical (see Appendix A), i.e., - 2.1.2.2 Frequency Difference. In a frequency differ- ence measurement approach, the reception of an acous- tic signal at the receiver is used as a reference for gener- ating a subsequent acoustic signal at the transmitter. Assuming no delays other than the propagation time of the acoustic pulses in the liquid, the frequency at which the pulses are generated or received is proportional to the reciprocal of their transit time. The equations derived in the previous paragraph are equally valid in this case, the 2 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	8	8
2.2.2	Secondary Device	ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 1 GENERAL 1.1 Scope This Standard applies only to ultrasonic flowmeters that base their operation on the measurement of transit times of acoustic signals. Further, this Standard concerns only the application of such meters when used to mea- sure the volumetric flow rate of a liquid exhibiting homogeneous acoustic properties and flowing in a com- pletely fdled closed conduit. Not covered by this Standard are ultrasonic flow- meters that derive volumetric flow rate from measure- ments of the deviation, scattering (Doppler flowmeter), or correlation of acoustic signals. 1.2 Purpose This Standard provides: (a) a description of the operating principles employed (b) a description of error sources and performance (c) a common set of terminology, symbols, defini- by the ultrasonic flowmeters covered in this Standard; verification procedures; tions, and specifications. 1.3 Terminology, Symbols, and Definitions Terminology and symbols used in this Standard, except for those defined below, are in accordance with ANWASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes. acoustic path - the path that the acoustic signals follow as they propagate through the measurement section be- tween the transducer elements axid flow velocity (Vax) - the component of liquid flow velocity at a point in the measurement section that is parallel to the measurement section’s axis and in the direction of the flow being measured cross flow velocity - the component of liquid flow ve- locity at a point in the measurement section that is per- pendicular to the measurement section’s axis measurement section - the section of conduit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals. The measurement section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section and lo- cated at the extreme upstream and downstream trans- ducer positions. nonrefractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid inter- faces at a right angle refractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid interfaces at other than a right angle transducer - the combination of the transducer element and passive materials transducer element - an active component that pro- duces either acoustic output in response to an electric stimulus and/or an electric output in response to an acoustic stimulus transit time (t) - the time required for an acoustic signal to traverse an acoustic path velocity profire correction factor (S) - a dimensionless factor based on measured knowledge of the velocity pro- file used to adjust the meter output 2 FLOWMETER DESCRIPTION The transit-time ultrasonic flowmeter being con- sidered in this Standard is a complete system composed of the primary device, which is a measurement section with one or more pairs of transducers, and the secondary device, which is the electronic equipment necessary to operate the transducers, make the measurements, pro- cess the measured data, and display or record results. 1 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	7	7
2.2.2.1	Operation of Transducers	MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIl-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Single Path Axial Multipath ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Diametric Chordal Chordal Diametric .FIG. 5 ACOUSTIC PATH CONFIGURATIONS types are axial, diametric, and chordal, as shown in Fig. 5. 2.2.2 Secondary Device. The secondary device com- prises the electronic equipment required to operate the transducers, make the measurements, process the mea- sured data, and display or record the results. 2.2.2.1 Operation of Transducers. Transducers may be excited simultaneously or alternately with one or more transmissions in each direction. The acoustic fre- quency and pulse repetition rate may vary. The intercon- necting cable lengths between the secondary and pri- mary devices are an important consideration, and their maximum length is usually defined by the manufacturer. 2.2.2.2 Measurement Method. The transit time of an acoustic pulse is usually taken to be the time interval between initial excitation of the transmitter and some characteristic point of the received signal. Exact details vary from one manufacturer to another. 2.2.2.3 Processing of Data. The processing section, in addition to estimating the flow rate from measured transit times, should be capable of rejecting invalid measurements, noise, etc. The indicated flow rate may be the result of one or more individual flow velocity determinations. 2.2.2.4 Displays and Outputs. Most meters have several outputs available, either as standard features or as optional additions to the equipment. Displays may show flow rate, integrated flow volume and/or direction, and may be analog or digital. Signal outputs usually in- clude one or more of the following: current, voltage, dig- ital, and a pulse rate proportional to flow. These outputs may or may not be electrically isolated. Flowmeters may also include alarms and diagnostic aids. 5 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	11	11
2.2.2.2	Measurement Method	MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIl-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Single Path Axial Multipath ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Diametric Chordal Chordal Diametric .FIG. 5 ACOUSTIC PATH CONFIGURATIONS types are axial, diametric, and chordal, as shown in Fig. 5. 2.2.2 Secondary Device. The secondary device com- prises the electronic equipment required to operate the transducers, make the measurements, process the mea- sured data, and display or record the results. 2.2.2.1 Operation of Transducers. Transducers may be excited simultaneously or alternately with one or more transmissions in each direction. The acoustic fre- quency and pulse repetition rate may vary. The intercon- necting cable lengths between the secondary and pri- mary devices are an important consideration, and their maximum length is usually defined by the manufacturer. 2.2.2.2 Measurement Method. The transit time of an acoustic pulse is usually taken to be the time interval between initial excitation of the transmitter and some characteristic point of the received signal. Exact details vary from one manufacturer to another. 2.2.2.3 Processing of Data. The processing section, in addition to estimating the flow rate from measured transit times, should be capable of rejecting invalid measurements, noise, etc. The indicated flow rate may be the result of one or more individual flow velocity determinations. 2.2.2.4 Displays and Outputs. Most meters have several outputs available, either as standard features or as optional additions to the equipment. Displays may show flow rate, integrated flow volume and/or direction, and may be analog or digital. Signal outputs usually in- clude one or more of the following: current, voltage, dig- ital, and a pulse rate proportional to flow. These outputs may or may not be electrically isolated. Flowmeters may also include alarms and diagnostic aids. 5 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	11	11
2.2.2.3	Processing of Data	MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIl-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Single Path Axial Multipath ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Diametric Chordal Chordal Diametric .FIG. 5 ACOUSTIC PATH CONFIGURATIONS types are axial, diametric, and chordal, as shown in Fig. 5. 2.2.2 Secondary Device. The secondary device com- prises the electronic equipment required to operate the transducers, make the measurements, process the mea- sured data, and display or record the results. 2.2.2.1 Operation of Transducers. Transducers may be excited simultaneously or alternately with one or more transmissions in each direction. The acoustic fre- quency and pulse repetition rate may vary. The intercon- necting cable lengths between the secondary and pri- mary devices are an important consideration, and their maximum length is usually defined by the manufacturer. 2.2.2.2 Measurement Method. The transit time of an acoustic pulse is usually taken to be the time interval between initial excitation of the transmitter and some characteristic point of the received signal. Exact details vary from one manufacturer to another. 2.2.2.3 Processing of Data. The processing section, in addition to estimating the flow rate from measured transit times, should be capable of rejecting invalid measurements, noise, etc. The indicated flow rate may be the result of one or more individual flow velocity determinations. 2.2.2.4 Displays and Outputs. Most meters have several outputs available, either as standard features or as optional additions to the equipment. Displays may show flow rate, integrated flow volume and/or direction, and may be analog or digital. Signal outputs usually in- clude one or more of the following: current, voltage, dig- ital, and a pulse rate proportional to flow. These outputs may or may not be electrically isolated. Flowmeters may also include alarms and diagnostic aids. 5 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	11	11
2.2.2.4	Displays and Outputs	MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIl-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Single Path Axial Multipath ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Diametric Chordal Chordal Diametric .FIG. 5 ACOUSTIC PATH CONFIGURATIONS types are axial, diametric, and chordal, as shown in Fig. 5. 2.2.2 Secondary Device. The secondary device com- prises the electronic equipment required to operate the transducers, make the measurements, process the mea- sured data, and display or record the results. 2.2.2.1 Operation of Transducers. Transducers may be excited simultaneously or alternately with one or more transmissions in each direction. The acoustic fre- quency and pulse repetition rate may vary. The intercon- necting cable lengths between the secondary and pri- mary devices are an important consideration, and their maximum length is usually defined by the manufacturer. 2.2.2.2 Measurement Method. The transit time of an acoustic pulse is usually taken to be the time interval between initial excitation of the transmitter and some characteristic point of the received signal. Exact details vary from one manufacturer to another. 2.2.2.3 Processing of Data. The processing section, in addition to estimating the flow rate from measured transit times, should be capable of rejecting invalid measurements, noise, etc. The indicated flow rate may be the result of one or more individual flow velocity determinations. 2.2.2.4 Displays and Outputs. Most meters have several outputs available, either as standard features or as optional additions to the equipment. Displays may show flow rate, integrated flow volume and/or direction, and may be analog or digital. Signal outputs usually in- clude one or more of the following: current, voltage, dig- ital, and a pulse rate proportional to flow. These outputs may or may not be electrically isolated. Flowmeters may also include alarms and diagnostic aids. 5 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	11	11
3	Error Sources and Their Reduction	CONTENTS ... Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111 Committee Roster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v 1 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2 Flowmeter Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 3 Error Sources and Their Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 4 Application Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 5 Meter Factor Determination and Verification .......................... 9 Figures 1 Wetted Transducer Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2 Protected Configuration With Cavities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 3 Protected Configuration With Protrusions ............................. 4 4 Protected Configuration With Smooth Bore ............................ 4 5 Acoustic Path Configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 6 A Typical Cross Path Ultrasonic Flowmeter Configuration (Paths May Be Multipath Diametric or Chordal) ............................ 7 Appendices A Acoustic Transit Time in a Nonuniform Fluid Velocity Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 B Selection Guidelines ........................................... 14 vii Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 1 GENERAL 1.1 Scope This Standard applies only to ultrasonic flowmeters that base their operation on the measurement of transit times of acoustic signals. Further, this Standard concerns only the application of such meters when used to mea- sure the volumetric flow rate of a liquid exhibiting homogeneous acoustic properties and flowing in a com- pletely fdled closed conduit. Not covered by this Standard are ultrasonic flow- meters that derive volumetric flow rate from measure- ments of the deviation, scattering (Doppler flowmeter), or correlation of acoustic signals. 1.2 Purpose This Standard provides: (a) a description of the operating principles employed (b) a description of error sources and performance (c) a common set of terminology, symbols, defini- by the ultrasonic flowmeters covered in this Standard; verification procedures; tions, and specifications. 1.3 Terminology, Symbols, and Definitions Terminology and symbols used in this Standard, except for those defined below, are in accordance with ANWASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes. acoustic path - the path that the acoustic signals follow as they propagate through the measurement section be- tween the transducer elements axid flow velocity (Vax) - the component of liquid flow velocity at a point in the measurement section that is parallel to the measurement section’s axis and in the direction of the flow being measured cross flow velocity - the component of liquid flow ve- locity at a point in the measurement section that is per- pendicular to the measurement section’s axis measurement section - the section of conduit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals. The measurement section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section and lo- cated at the extreme upstream and downstream trans- ducer positions. nonrefractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid inter- faces at a right angle refractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid interfaces at other than a right angle transducer - the combination of the transducer element and passive materials transducer element - an active component that pro- duces either acoustic output in response to an electric stimulus and/or an electric output in response to an acoustic stimulus transit time (t) - the time required for an acoustic signal to traverse an acoustic path velocity profire correction factor (S) - a dimensionless factor based on measured knowledge of the velocity pro- file used to adjust the meter output 2 FLOWMETER DESCRIPTION The transit-time ultrasonic flowmeter being con- sidered in this Standard is a complete system composed of the primary device, which is a measurement section with one or more pairs of transducers, and the secondary device, which is the electronic equipment necessary to operate the transducers, make the measurements, pro- cess the measured data, and display or record results. 1 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	6	6
3.1	Axial Velocity Estimate	ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 3 ERROR SOURCES AND THEIR REDUCTION The purpose of this Section is to describe possible er- ror sources for the ultrasonic flowmeters covered by this Standard. Although these errors may not be significant in some cases, they should all be addressed in detail when analyzing the error for a particular flowmeter. 3.1 Axial Velocity Estimate Axial velocity errors are those errors that are made in the determination of Fax across an acoustic path [see Eqs. (5)-(8)]. . 3.1.1 Acoustic Path Length and Angle. The determi- nation of axial flow velocity (Fa) is based on the acous- tic path length (1,) and angle (6). The error in v, is in direct proportion to the uncertainty in the acoustic path length and angle. Acoustic path length and angle errors may be static due to inaccuracies in the initial measure- ments, or they may be dynamic due to changes in the measurement section or, in the case of refractive sys- tems, changes in the index of refraction of the materials in the acoustic path. Errors in the acoustic path .length or angle for nonre- fractive systems can be reduced by accurate geometric and acoustic measurements. For flowmeters in which sound energy undergoes refraction, errors in acoustic path length or angle can be reduced by design and/or compensation based upon knowledge of the speed of sound in the process liquid and intervening materials be- tween the transducer element and the process liquid. In certain applications, compensation for changes in acoustic path length and angle which result from temper- ature or pressure induced pipe deformation may be pro- vided for in either refractive or nonrefractive systems. Systems where the transducers are field mounted can achieve accuracies comparable to systems where the transducers are factory mounted if precise postinstalla- tion measurements are made and the scaling of the elec- tronics is adjusted to reflect these as-built dimensions. 3.1.2 Transit Time 3.1.2.1 Timing. Uncertainty in the transit-time mea- surement due to limits in internal timing accuracy - and resolution lead to a corresponding uncertainty in V,. Errors in the measurement of transit time may be re- duced by the use of stable and accurate high frequency oscillators and averaging many individual transit-time measurements. Transit-time measurement errors are the most amenable of all potential errors to analysis. Transit-time measurement errors due to differences between upstream to downstream and downstream to upstream electronic signal paths may be reduced by MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS using the same detection electronics and transducer pairs for both directions of propagation. 3.1.2.2 Signal Detection. Acoustic transit-time mea- surements may be affected by inconsistencies in recogni- tion of the received acoustic signal caused by variations in received signal level of waveform and noise. (a) Variations in received signal level or waveform can occur as the acoustic properties of the liquid in the measurement section change because of excessive amounts of entrained air, suspended solids, temperature, pressure, etc., or as transducer fouling occurs. These vari- ations may result in uncertainty in determining the tran- sit time, thus causing uncertainty in V,. (b) Noise can affect the accuracy of the transit-time measurement. Noise sources may be either electrical or acoustic, and either external or self-generated. Generally, externally generated electronic or acoustic noise is ran- dom with respect to the received signal. Self-generated acoustic noise, however, is usually synchronized with the received signal and is therefore much harder to compen- sate for in the secondary device. Signal detection errors are reduced by operating with high signal-to-noise ratios. Methods can be provided that will reject those signals which are excessively attenuated or which are distorted by noise. If the background noise is caused by external sources, the signal-to-noise ratio can be improved by increasing the transmitted signal level. However, in many cases, the most troublesome noise is self-generated acoustic noise. This noise generally increases as the level of the trans- mitted signal is increased. The signal-to-noise ratio, in these cases, may be improved by acoustically isolating the transducers from the measurement section by ap- plication of damping materials and/or other suitable techniques. 3.1.3 Sound Speed Dependency. The speed of sound in the liquid and in any intervening materials along the acoustic path varies with composition, temperature, and pressure. Depending upon a particular ultrasonic flow- meter’s design, I,, 8 , and to (f,) [Eqs. (7) and (811 may be affected. In nearly all cases, the errors caused by sound speed variations in the liquid are negligible for a properly im- plemented, nonrefractive, wetted transducer system. Changes in the speed of sound in the intervening ma- terial may, however, require compensation for non- wetted transducer systems. In refractive systems, changes in the speed of sound in intervening materials and the process liquid affect the acoustic path length and angle. It is possible to compen- sate for these effects. In rare cases, changes in the speed 6 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	12	12
3.1.1	Acoustic Path Length and Angle	ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 3 ERROR SOURCES AND THEIR REDUCTION The purpose of this Section is to describe possible er- ror sources for the ultrasonic flowmeters covered by this Standard. Although these errors may not be significant in some cases, they should all be addressed in detail when analyzing the error for a particular flowmeter. 3.1 Axial Velocity Estimate Axial velocity errors are those errors that are made in the determination of Fax across an acoustic path [see Eqs. (5)-(8)]. . 3.1.1 Acoustic Path Length and Angle. The determi- nation of axial flow velocity (Fa) is based on the acous- tic path length (1,) and angle (6). The error in v, is in direct proportion to the uncertainty in the acoustic path length and angle. Acoustic path length and angle errors may be static due to inaccuracies in the initial measure- ments, or they may be dynamic due to changes in the measurement section or, in the case of refractive sys- tems, changes in the index of refraction of the materials in the acoustic path. Errors in the acoustic path .length or angle for nonre- fractive systems can be reduced by accurate geometric and acoustic measurements. For flowmeters in which sound energy undergoes refraction, errors in acoustic path length or angle can be reduced by design and/or compensation based upon knowledge of the speed of sound in the process liquid and intervening materials be- tween the transducer element and the process liquid. In certain applications, compensation for changes in acoustic path length and angle which result from temper- ature or pressure induced pipe deformation may be pro- vided for in either refractive or nonrefractive systems. Systems where the transducers are field mounted can achieve accuracies comparable to systems where the transducers are factory mounted if precise postinstalla- tion measurements are made and the scaling of the elec- tronics is adjusted to reflect these as-built dimensions. 3.1.2 Transit Time 3.1.2.1 Timing. Uncertainty in the transit-time mea- surement due to limits in internal timing accuracy - and resolution lead to a corresponding uncertainty in V,. Errors in the measurement of transit time may be re- duced by the use of stable and accurate high frequency oscillators and averaging many individual transit-time measurements. Transit-time measurement errors are the most amenable of all potential errors to analysis. Transit-time measurement errors due to differences between upstream to downstream and downstream to upstream electronic signal paths may be reduced by MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS using the same detection electronics and transducer pairs for both directions of propagation. 3.1.2.2 Signal Detection. Acoustic transit-time mea- surements may be affected by inconsistencies in recogni- tion of the received acoustic signal caused by variations in received signal level of waveform and noise. (a) Variations in received signal level or waveform can occur as the acoustic properties of the liquid in the measurement section change because of excessive amounts of entrained air, suspended solids, temperature, pressure, etc., or as transducer fouling occurs. These vari- ations may result in uncertainty in determining the tran- sit time, thus causing uncertainty in V,. (b) Noise can affect the accuracy of the transit-time measurement. Noise sources may be either electrical or acoustic, and either external or self-generated. Generally, externally generated electronic or acoustic noise is ran- dom with respect to the received signal. Self-generated acoustic noise, however, is usually synchronized with the received signal and is therefore much harder to compen- sate for in the secondary device. Signal detection errors are reduced by operating with high signal-to-noise ratios. Methods can be provided that will reject those signals which are excessively attenuated or which are distorted by noise. If the background noise is caused by external sources, the signal-to-noise ratio can be improved by increasing the transmitted signal level. However, in many cases, the most troublesome noise is self-generated acoustic noise. This noise generally increases as the level of the trans- mitted signal is increased. The signal-to-noise ratio, in these cases, may be improved by acoustically isolating the transducers from the measurement section by ap- plication of damping materials and/or other suitable techniques. 3.1.3 Sound Speed Dependency. The speed of sound in the liquid and in any intervening materials along the acoustic path varies with composition, temperature, and pressure. Depending upon a particular ultrasonic flow- meter’s design, I,, 8 , and to (f,) [Eqs. (7) and (811 may be affected. In nearly all cases, the errors caused by sound speed variations in the liquid are negligible for a properly im- plemented, nonrefractive, wetted transducer system. Changes in the speed of sound in the intervening ma- terial may, however, require compensation for non- wetted transducer systems. In refractive systems, changes in the speed of sound in intervening materials and the process liquid affect the acoustic path length and angle. It is possible to compen- sate for these effects. In rare cases, changes in the speed 6 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	12	12
3.1.2	Transit Time	CONTENTS ... Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111 Committee Roster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v 1 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2 Flowmeter Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 3 Error Sources and Their Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 4 Application Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 5 Meter Factor Determination and Verification .......................... 9 Figures 1 Wetted Transducer Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2 Protected Configuration With Cavities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 3 Protected Configuration With Protrusions ............................. 4 4 Protected Configuration With Smooth Bore ............................ 4 5 Acoustic Path Configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 6 A Typical Cross Path Ultrasonic Flowmeter Configuration (Paths May Be Multipath Diametric or Chordal) ............................ 7 Appendices A Acoustic Transit Time in a Nonuniform Fluid Velocity Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 B Selection Guidelines ........................................... 14 vii Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 1 GENERAL 1.1 Scope This Standard applies only to ultrasonic flowmeters that base their operation on the measurement of transit times of acoustic signals. Further, this Standard concerns only the application of such meters when used to mea- sure the volumetric flow rate of a liquid exhibiting homogeneous acoustic properties and flowing in a com- pletely fdled closed conduit. Not covered by this Standard are ultrasonic flow- meters that derive volumetric flow rate from measure- ments of the deviation, scattering (Doppler flowmeter), or correlation of acoustic signals. 1.2 Purpose This Standard provides: (a) a description of the operating principles employed (b) a description of error sources and performance (c) a common set of terminology, symbols, defini- by the ultrasonic flowmeters covered in this Standard; verification procedures; tions, and specifications. 1.3 Terminology, Symbols, and Definitions Terminology and symbols used in this Standard, except for those defined below, are in accordance with ANWASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes. acoustic path - the path that the acoustic signals follow as they propagate through the measurement section be- tween the transducer elements axid flow velocity (Vax) - the component of liquid flow velocity at a point in the measurement section that is parallel to the measurement section’s axis and in the direction of the flow being measured cross flow velocity - the component of liquid flow ve- locity at a point in the measurement section that is per- pendicular to the measurement section’s axis measurement section - the section of conduit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals. The measurement section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section and lo- cated at the extreme upstream and downstream trans- ducer positions. nonrefractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid inter- faces at a right angle refractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid interfaces at other than a right angle transducer - the combination of the transducer element and passive materials transducer element - an active component that pro- duces either acoustic output in response to an electric stimulus and/or an electric output in response to an acoustic stimulus transit time (t) - the time required for an acoustic signal to traverse an acoustic path velocity profire correction factor (S) - a dimensionless factor based on measured knowledge of the velocity pro- file used to adjust the meter output 2 FLOWMETER DESCRIPTION The transit-time ultrasonic flowmeter being con- sidered in this Standard is a complete system composed of the primary device, which is a measurement section with one or more pairs of transducers, and the secondary device, which is the electronic equipment necessary to operate the transducers, make the measurements, pro- cess the measured data, and display or record results. 1 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	6	6
3.1.2.1	Timing	ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 3 ERROR SOURCES AND THEIR REDUCTION The purpose of this Section is to describe possible er- ror sources for the ultrasonic flowmeters covered by this Standard. Although these errors may not be significant in some cases, they should all be addressed in detail when analyzing the error for a particular flowmeter. 3.1 Axial Velocity Estimate Axial velocity errors are those errors that are made in the determination of Fax across an acoustic path [see Eqs. (5)-(8)]. . 3.1.1 Acoustic Path Length and Angle. The determi- nation of axial flow velocity (Fa) is based on the acous- tic path length (1,) and angle (6). The error in v, is in direct proportion to the uncertainty in the acoustic path length and angle. Acoustic path length and angle errors may be static due to inaccuracies in the initial measure- ments, or they may be dynamic due to changes in the measurement section or, in the case of refractive sys- tems, changes in the index of refraction of the materials in the acoustic path. Errors in the acoustic path .length or angle for nonre- fractive systems can be reduced by accurate geometric and acoustic measurements. For flowmeters in which sound energy undergoes refraction, errors in acoustic path length or angle can be reduced by design and/or compensation based upon knowledge of the speed of sound in the process liquid and intervening materials be- tween the transducer element and the process liquid. In certain applications, compensation for changes in acoustic path length and angle which result from temper- ature or pressure induced pipe deformation may be pro- vided for in either refractive or nonrefractive systems. Systems where the transducers are field mounted can achieve accuracies comparable to systems where the transducers are factory mounted if precise postinstalla- tion measurements are made and the scaling of the elec- tronics is adjusted to reflect these as-built dimensions. 3.1.2 Transit Time 3.1.2.1 Timing. Uncertainty in the transit-time mea- surement due to limits in internal timing accuracy - and resolution lead to a corresponding uncertainty in V,. Errors in the measurement of transit time may be re- duced by the use of stable and accurate high frequency oscillators and averaging many individual transit-time measurements. Transit-time measurement errors are the most amenable of all potential errors to analysis. Transit-time measurement errors due to differences between upstream to downstream and downstream to upstream electronic signal paths may be reduced by MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS using the same detection electronics and transducer pairs for both directions of propagation. 3.1.2.2 Signal Detection. Acoustic transit-time mea- surements may be affected by inconsistencies in recogni- tion of the received acoustic signal caused by variations in received signal level of waveform and noise. (a) Variations in received signal level or waveform can occur as the acoustic properties of the liquid in the measurement section change because of excessive amounts of entrained air, suspended solids, temperature, pressure, etc., or as transducer fouling occurs. These vari- ations may result in uncertainty in determining the tran- sit time, thus causing uncertainty in V,. (b) Noise can affect the accuracy of the transit-time measurement. Noise sources may be either electrical or acoustic, and either external or self-generated. Generally, externally generated electronic or acoustic noise is ran- dom with respect to the received signal. Self-generated acoustic noise, however, is usually synchronized with the received signal and is therefore much harder to compen- sate for in the secondary device. Signal detection errors are reduced by operating with high signal-to-noise ratios. Methods can be provided that will reject those signals which are excessively attenuated or which are distorted by noise. If the background noise is caused by external sources, the signal-to-noise ratio can be improved by increasing the transmitted signal level. However, in many cases, the most troublesome noise is self-generated acoustic noise. This noise generally increases as the level of the trans- mitted signal is increased. The signal-to-noise ratio, in these cases, may be improved by acoustically isolating the transducers from the measurement section by ap- plication of damping materials and/or other suitable techniques. 3.1.3 Sound Speed Dependency. The speed of sound in the liquid and in any intervening materials along the acoustic path varies with composition, temperature, and pressure. Depending upon a particular ultrasonic flow- meter’s design, I,, 8 , and to (f,) [Eqs. (7) and (811 may be affected. In nearly all cases, the errors caused by sound speed variations in the liquid are negligible for a properly im- plemented, nonrefractive, wetted transducer system. Changes in the speed of sound in the intervening ma- terial may, however, require compensation for non- wetted transducer systems. In refractive systems, changes in the speed of sound in intervening materials and the process liquid affect the acoustic path length and angle. It is possible to compen- sate for these effects. In rare cases, changes in the speed 6 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	12	12
3.1.2.2	Signal Detection	ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 3 ERROR SOURCES AND THEIR REDUCTION The purpose of this Section is to describe possible er- ror sources for the ultrasonic flowmeters covered by this Standard. Although these errors may not be significant in some cases, they should all be addressed in detail when analyzing the error for a particular flowmeter. 3.1 Axial Velocity Estimate Axial velocity errors are those errors that are made in the determination of Fax across an acoustic path [see Eqs. (5)-(8)]. . 3.1.1 Acoustic Path Length and Angle. The determi- nation of axial flow velocity (Fa) is based on the acous- tic path length (1,) and angle (6). The error in v, is in direct proportion to the uncertainty in the acoustic path length and angle. Acoustic path length and angle errors may be static due to inaccuracies in the initial measure- ments, or they may be dynamic due to changes in the measurement section or, in the case of refractive sys- tems, changes in the index of refraction of the materials in the acoustic path. Errors in the acoustic path .length or angle for nonre- fractive systems can be reduced by accurate geometric and acoustic measurements. For flowmeters in which sound energy undergoes refraction, errors in acoustic path length or angle can be reduced by design and/or compensation based upon knowledge of the speed of sound in the process liquid and intervening materials be- tween the transducer element and the process liquid. In certain applications, compensation for changes in acoustic path length and angle which result from temper- ature or pressure induced pipe deformation may be pro- vided for in either refractive or nonrefractive systems. Systems where the transducers are field mounted can achieve accuracies comparable to systems where the transducers are factory mounted if precise postinstalla- tion measurements are made and the scaling of the elec- tronics is adjusted to reflect these as-built dimensions. 3.1.2 Transit Time 3.1.2.1 Timing. Uncertainty in the transit-time mea- surement due to limits in internal timing accuracy - and resolution lead to a corresponding uncertainty in V,. Errors in the measurement of transit time may be re- duced by the use of stable and accurate high frequency oscillators and averaging many individual transit-time measurements. Transit-time measurement errors are the most amenable of all potential errors to analysis. Transit-time measurement errors due to differences between upstream to downstream and downstream to upstream electronic signal paths may be reduced by MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS using the same detection electronics and transducer pairs for both directions of propagation. 3.1.2.2 Signal Detection. Acoustic transit-time mea- surements may be affected by inconsistencies in recogni- tion of the received acoustic signal caused by variations in received signal level of waveform and noise. (a) Variations in received signal level or waveform can occur as the acoustic properties of the liquid in the measurement section change because of excessive amounts of entrained air, suspended solids, temperature, pressure, etc., or as transducer fouling occurs. These vari- ations may result in uncertainty in determining the tran- sit time, thus causing uncertainty in V,. (b) Noise can affect the accuracy of the transit-time measurement. Noise sources may be either electrical or acoustic, and either external or self-generated. Generally, externally generated electronic or acoustic noise is ran- dom with respect to the received signal. Self-generated acoustic noise, however, is usually synchronized with the received signal and is therefore much harder to compen- sate for in the secondary device. Signal detection errors are reduced by operating with high signal-to-noise ratios. Methods can be provided that will reject those signals which are excessively attenuated or which are distorted by noise. If the background noise is caused by external sources, the signal-to-noise ratio can be improved by increasing the transmitted signal level. However, in many cases, the most troublesome noise is self-generated acoustic noise. This noise generally increases as the level of the trans- mitted signal is increased. The signal-to-noise ratio, in these cases, may be improved by acoustically isolating the transducers from the measurement section by ap- plication of damping materials and/or other suitable techniques. 3.1.3 Sound Speed Dependency. The speed of sound in the liquid and in any intervening materials along the acoustic path varies with composition, temperature, and pressure. Depending upon a particular ultrasonic flow- meter’s design, I,, 8 , and to (f,) [Eqs. (7) and (811 may be affected. In nearly all cases, the errors caused by sound speed variations in the liquid are negligible for a properly im- plemented, nonrefractive, wetted transducer system. Changes in the speed of sound in the intervening ma- terial may, however, require compensation for non- wetted transducer systems. In refractive systems, changes in the speed of sound in intervening materials and the process liquid affect the acoustic path length and angle. It is possible to compen- sate for these effects. In rare cases, changes in the speed 6 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	12	12
3.1.3	Sound Speed Dependency	ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 3 ERROR SOURCES AND THEIR REDUCTION The purpose of this Section is to describe possible er- ror sources for the ultrasonic flowmeters covered by this Standard. Although these errors may not be significant in some cases, they should all be addressed in detail when analyzing the error for a particular flowmeter. 3.1 Axial Velocity Estimate Axial velocity errors are those errors that are made in the determination of Fax across an acoustic path [see Eqs. (5)-(8)]. . 3.1.1 Acoustic Path Length and Angle. The determi- nation of axial flow velocity (Fa) is based on the acous- tic path length (1,) and angle (6). The error in v, is in direct proportion to the uncertainty in the acoustic path length and angle. Acoustic path length and angle errors may be static due to inaccuracies in the initial measure- ments, or they may be dynamic due to changes in the measurement section or, in the case of refractive sys- tems, changes in the index of refraction of the materials in the acoustic path. Errors in the acoustic path .length or angle for nonre- fractive systems can be reduced by accurate geometric and acoustic measurements. For flowmeters in which sound energy undergoes refraction, errors in acoustic path length or angle can be reduced by design and/or compensation based upon knowledge of the speed of sound in the process liquid and intervening materials be- tween the transducer element and the process liquid. In certain applications, compensation for changes in acoustic path length and angle which result from temper- ature or pressure induced pipe deformation may be pro- vided for in either refractive or nonrefractive systems. Systems where the transducers are field mounted can achieve accuracies comparable to systems where the transducers are factory mounted if precise postinstalla- tion measurements are made and the scaling of the elec- tronics is adjusted to reflect these as-built dimensions. 3.1.2 Transit Time 3.1.2.1 Timing. Uncertainty in the transit-time mea- surement due to limits in internal timing accuracy - and resolution lead to a corresponding uncertainty in V,. Errors in the measurement of transit time may be re- duced by the use of stable and accurate high frequency oscillators and averaging many individual transit-time measurements. Transit-time measurement errors are the most amenable of all potential errors to analysis. Transit-time measurement errors due to differences between upstream to downstream and downstream to upstream electronic signal paths may be reduced by MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS using the same detection electronics and transducer pairs for both directions of propagation. 3.1.2.2 Signal Detection. Acoustic transit-time mea- surements may be affected by inconsistencies in recogni- tion of the received acoustic signal caused by variations in received signal level of waveform and noise. (a) Variations in received signal level or waveform can occur as the acoustic properties of the liquid in the measurement section change because of excessive amounts of entrained air, suspended solids, temperature, pressure, etc., or as transducer fouling occurs. These vari- ations may result in uncertainty in determining the tran- sit time, thus causing uncertainty in V,. (b) Noise can affect the accuracy of the transit-time measurement. Noise sources may be either electrical or acoustic, and either external or self-generated. Generally, externally generated electronic or acoustic noise is ran- dom with respect to the received signal. Self-generated acoustic noise, however, is usually synchronized with the received signal and is therefore much harder to compen- sate for in the secondary device. Signal detection errors are reduced by operating with high signal-to-noise ratios. Methods can be provided that will reject those signals which are excessively attenuated or which are distorted by noise. If the background noise is caused by external sources, the signal-to-noise ratio can be improved by increasing the transmitted signal level. However, in many cases, the most troublesome noise is self-generated acoustic noise. This noise generally increases as the level of the trans- mitted signal is increased. The signal-to-noise ratio, in these cases, may be improved by acoustically isolating the transducers from the measurement section by ap- plication of damping materials and/or other suitable techniques. 3.1.3 Sound Speed Dependency. The speed of sound in the liquid and in any intervening materials along the acoustic path varies with composition, temperature, and pressure. Depending upon a particular ultrasonic flow- meter’s design, I,, 8 , and to (f,) [Eqs. (7) and (811 may be affected. In nearly all cases, the errors caused by sound speed variations in the liquid are negligible for a properly im- plemented, nonrefractive, wetted transducer system. Changes in the speed of sound in the intervening ma- terial may, however, require compensation for non- wetted transducer systems. In refractive systems, changes in the speed of sound in intervening materials and the process liquid affect the acoustic path length and angle. It is possible to compen- sate for these effects. In rare cases, changes in the speed 6 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	12	12
3.1.4	Secondary Flow	MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD / / \ / \ FIG. 6 A TYPICAL CROSS PATH ULTRASONIC FLOWMETER CONFIGURATION (PATHS MAY BE MULTIPATH DIAMETRIC OR CHORDAL) of sound in the liquid may refract the beam so much that it misses the opposing transducer. Accurate knowl- edge of the speed of sound in a particular liquid can reduce this possibility. 3.1.4 Secondary Flow. Secondary flow can produce an error in the determination of v, since it is normally assumed in the calculations that all flow is in the axial direction. Secondary flow is a result of flow perturba- tions occurring upstream or downstream of the measure- ment section because of devices such as elbows, valves, and pumps. Secondary flow may result in an error in determining - the transit time which ultimately affects The most effective way to reduce secondary flow er- rors is to avoid installations where severe secondary flow exists. Reduction of secondary flow may require long, straight runs of pipe and/or the use of flow straighteners, depending upon the nature of the secondary flow source and the accuracy required. Secondary flow errors can also be reduced by the use of an appropriate acoustic path orientation or by computing line velocities on ap- propriate multiple acoustic paths, i.e., crossed paths as illustrated in Fig. 6 , and averaging. vu. 3.2 Integration Integration error is the error in the flow rate estimate which occurs in the computation of the flow rate from Fa,, A , S, and Wi as shown in Eq. (10). 3.2.1 Cross Section Dimensional Errors. Error in the assumed cross-sectional area of the measurement section causes an error in the flow rate estimate. This error may be due to initial measurement section shape irregularities, such as out-of-roundness; or it may be due to changes in the initial shape caused by temperature, pressure, or structural loading. It may also be due to the formation of deposits or growths, such as algae,'in the measurement section. Usually it is due to combinations of the items mentioned above. Cross section dimensional errors can be reduced by manufacturing or choosing a measurement section which has constant dimensions along its length, can be accu- rately measured, and has a stable surface so that cross section changes with time due to corrosion, material buildup, or loss of protective coatings will be small. Additionally, if temperatures or pressures are expected to be substantially different from reference conditions, it may be necessary to adjust the measured dimensions to compensate for dimensional changes that may occur under operating conditions. In circular pipes, cross section dimensional errors can be reduced by minimizing the effects of out-of-roundness through averaging of diameter measurements made at the upstream, middle, and downstream ends of the mea- surement section. The measurement section should be inspected period- ically to determine if the dimensional factor should be adjusted to compensate for observed changes. 3.22 Acoustic Path Location. T h e acoustic path lo- cation, particularly in multipath flowmeters, is an impor- tant contributor to overall flowmeter accuracy. The un- certainty in the position of the acoustic path can cause errors through improper assignment of a weighting fac- tor (Wi) and by causing unnecessary sensitivity of i, to the velocity profile through nonoptimum placement of transducers. Errors due to acoustic path location can be reduced by suitable manufacturing techniques in the case of a prefabricated measurement section or by accurately determining the acoustic path for systems where the transducers are field mounted. Path locations can be 7 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	13	13
3.2	Integration	MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD / / \ / \ FIG. 6 A TYPICAL CROSS PATH ULTRASONIC FLOWMETER CONFIGURATION (PATHS MAY BE MULTIPATH DIAMETRIC OR CHORDAL) of sound in the liquid may refract the beam so much that it misses the opposing transducer. Accurate knowl- edge of the speed of sound in a particular liquid can reduce this possibility. 3.1.4 Secondary Flow. Secondary flow can produce an error in the determination of v, since it is normally assumed in the calculations that all flow is in the axial direction. Secondary flow is a result of flow perturba- tions occurring upstream or downstream of the measure- ment section because of devices such as elbows, valves, and pumps. Secondary flow may result in an error in determining - the transit time which ultimately affects The most effective way to reduce secondary flow er- rors is to avoid installations where severe secondary flow exists. Reduction of secondary flow may require long, straight runs of pipe and/or the use of flow straighteners, depending upon the nature of the secondary flow source and the accuracy required. Secondary flow errors can also be reduced by the use of an appropriate acoustic path orientation or by computing line velocities on ap- propriate multiple acoustic paths, i.e., crossed paths as illustrated in Fig. 6 , and averaging. vu. 3.2 Integration Integration error is the error in the flow rate estimate which occurs in the computation of the flow rate from Fa,, A , S, and Wi as shown in Eq. (10). 3.2.1 Cross Section Dimensional Errors. Error in the assumed cross-sectional area of the measurement section causes an error in the flow rate estimate. This error may be due to initial measurement section shape irregularities, such as out-of-roundness; or it may be due to changes in the initial shape caused by temperature, pressure, or structural loading. It may also be due to the formation of deposits or growths, such as algae,'in the measurement section. Usually it is due to combinations of the items mentioned above. Cross section dimensional errors can be reduced by manufacturing or choosing a measurement section which has constant dimensions along its length, can be accu- rately measured, and has a stable surface so that cross section changes with time due to corrosion, material buildup, or loss of protective coatings will be small. Additionally, if temperatures or pressures are expected to be substantially different from reference conditions, it may be necessary to adjust the measured dimensions to compensate for dimensional changes that may occur under operating conditions. In circular pipes, cross section dimensional errors can be reduced by minimizing the effects of out-of-roundness through averaging of diameter measurements made at the upstream, middle, and downstream ends of the mea- surement section. The measurement section should be inspected period- ically to determine if the dimensional factor should be adjusted to compensate for observed changes. 3.22 Acoustic Path Location. T h e acoustic path lo- cation, particularly in multipath flowmeters, is an impor- tant contributor to overall flowmeter accuracy. The un- certainty in the position of the acoustic path can cause errors through improper assignment of a weighting fac- tor (Wi) and by causing unnecessary sensitivity of i, to the velocity profile through nonoptimum placement of transducers. Errors due to acoustic path location can be reduced by suitable manufacturing techniques in the case of a prefabricated measurement section or by accurately determining the acoustic path for systems where the transducers are field mounted. Path locations can be 7 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	13	13
3.2.1	Cross Section Dimensional Errors	MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD / / \ / \ FIG. 6 A TYPICAL CROSS PATH ULTRASONIC FLOWMETER CONFIGURATION (PATHS MAY BE MULTIPATH DIAMETRIC OR CHORDAL) of sound in the liquid may refract the beam so much that it misses the opposing transducer. Accurate knowl- edge of the speed of sound in a particular liquid can reduce this possibility. 3.1.4 Secondary Flow. Secondary flow can produce an error in the determination of v, since it is normally assumed in the calculations that all flow is in the axial direction. Secondary flow is a result of flow perturba- tions occurring upstream or downstream of the measure- ment section because of devices such as elbows, valves, and pumps. Secondary flow may result in an error in determining - the transit time which ultimately affects The most effective way to reduce secondary flow er- rors is to avoid installations where severe secondary flow exists. Reduction of secondary flow may require long, straight runs of pipe and/or the use of flow straighteners, depending upon the nature of the secondary flow source and the accuracy required. Secondary flow errors can also be reduced by the use of an appropriate acoustic path orientation or by computing line velocities on ap- propriate multiple acoustic paths, i.e., crossed paths as illustrated in Fig. 6 , and averaging. vu. 3.2 Integration Integration error is the error in the flow rate estimate which occurs in the computation of the flow rate from Fa,, A , S, and Wi as shown in Eq. (10). 3.2.1 Cross Section Dimensional Errors. Error in the assumed cross-sectional area of the measurement section causes an error in the flow rate estimate. This error may be due to initial measurement section shape irregularities, such as out-of-roundness; or it may be due to changes in the initial shape caused by temperature, pressure, or structural loading. It may also be due to the formation of deposits or growths, such as algae,'in the measurement section. Usually it is due to combinations of the items mentioned above. Cross section dimensional errors can be reduced by manufacturing or choosing a measurement section which has constant dimensions along its length, can be accu- rately measured, and has a stable surface so that cross section changes with time due to corrosion, material buildup, or loss of protective coatings will be small. Additionally, if temperatures or pressures are expected to be substantially different from reference conditions, it may be necessary to adjust the measured dimensions to compensate for dimensional changes that may occur under operating conditions. In circular pipes, cross section dimensional errors can be reduced by minimizing the effects of out-of-roundness through averaging of diameter measurements made at the upstream, middle, and downstream ends of the mea- surement section. The measurement section should be inspected period- ically to determine if the dimensional factor should be adjusted to compensate for observed changes. 3.22 Acoustic Path Location. T h e acoustic path lo- cation, particularly in multipath flowmeters, is an impor- tant contributor to overall flowmeter accuracy. The un- certainty in the position of the acoustic path can cause errors through improper assignment of a weighting fac- tor (Wi) and by causing unnecessary sensitivity of i, to the velocity profile through nonoptimum placement of transducers. Errors due to acoustic path location can be reduced by suitable manufacturing techniques in the case of a prefabricated measurement section or by accurately determining the acoustic path for systems where the transducers are field mounted. Path locations can be 7 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	13	13
3.2.2	Acoustic Path Location	MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD transit time being replaced by the reciprocal of a con- 2.1.4 Estimating Volumetric Flow. Once the average stant (Kf) times the frequencies, i.e., axial flow velocity along an acoustic path has been found, the volumetric flow rate can be calculated from - Kf 10 the following equation: v, = (fdown - fup) (6) 2 cos eo n 2.1.3 Transducer Considerations. In the preceding paragraph it was assumed that the transducer element was in direct contact with the liquid and that the acous- tic signal was propagated normal to the transducer/liquid interface. In most’ cases it is desirable to protect the transducer element from the process liquid by using in- tervening materials (see Figs. 2 and 3). If such an ar- rangement is employed, Eq. (5) takes the following form: where to, a function of temperature, is the transit time of the acoustic signals in the intervening materials. The equation appropriate to the frequency difference technique must also be modified: where fo is equal to 1 /to. Use of an intervening material also allows the possibil- ity of acoustic signals entering and leaving the liquid along a path that is not normal to the solid/liquid inter- face. For example, the intervening material could be flush with the inside surface of the conduit as in Fig. 4. This further complicates the acoustic analysis.since not only the corrections mentioned above, but also correc- tions for the refraction of the acoustic signals at the solid/liquid interface must be introduced. This refraction takes place according to Snell’s Law, i.e., where C is the sound speed in the liquid and Cp is the sound speed in the intervening material. As a conse- quence, 0 and to (f,) in Eqs. (7) and (8) now become functions of the sound speeds (C, Cp), and hence, in gen- eral, of the temperature, pressure, and composition of the process fluid and intervening materials. where: A = the average cross-sectional area of the measure- ment section (L*) Q = the volumetric flow rate in the measurement section (L3/t) S = a velocity profile correction factor (dimension- less) v,i = the average axial flow velocity along acoustic path i(L/t) Wi = a weighting factor for acoustic path i that is de- pendent on measurement section geometry and acoustic path location (dimensionless) Note that increasing n can reduce the sensitivity of S to flow profiie variations. n = the number of acoustic paths 2.2 Implementation 2.2.1 Primary Device. The primary device consists of a separate spool piece with transducers installed, or an existing section of conduit to which transducers are in- stalled in the field. 2.2.1.1 Measurement Section. The section of con- duit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals is called the measurement section. This section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section located at the extreme up- stream and downstream transducer positions. The mea- surement section is usually circular in cross section; how- ever, it may be square, rectangular, elliptical, or some other shape. 2.2.1.2 Transducers. The transducers transmit and receive acoustic energy. They may be factory rtlounted or field mounted by clamping, threading, or bonding. Transducers may be wetted by the liquid or be non- wetted. Wetted transducers may be flush mounted, re- cessed, or protrude into the flow stream. Some non- wetted transducers may be removed while the line is in service. 2.2.1.3 Acoustic Paths. There may be one (single path) or more (multipath) acoustic paths in the measure- ment section, each having a pair of transducers. Common 3 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Upstream transducer element Downstream transducer element I I MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Intervening material \ \ \ I Measurement I section FIG. 3 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH PROTRUSIONS FIG. 1 WETTED TRANSDUCER CONFIGURATION Intervening material '\ \ Intervening material L?\ FIG. 2 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH FIG. 4 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH CAVITIES SMOOTH BORE 4 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIl-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Single Path Axial Multipath ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Diametric Chordal Chordal Diametric .FIG. 5 ACOUSTIC PATH CONFIGURATIONS types are axial, diametric, and chordal, as shown in Fig. 5. 2.2.2 Secondary Device. The secondary device com- prises the electronic equipment required to operate the transducers, make the measurements, process the mea- sured data, and display or record the results. 2.2.2.1 Operation of Transducers. Transducers may be excited simultaneously or alternately with one or more transmissions in each direction. The acoustic fre- quency and pulse repetition rate may vary. The intercon- necting cable lengths between the secondary and pri- mary devices are an important consideration, and their maximum length is usually defined by the manufacturer. 2.2.2.2 Measurement Method. The transit time of an acoustic pulse is usually taken to be the time interval between initial excitation of the transmitter and some characteristic point of the received signal. Exact details vary from one manufacturer to another. 2.2.2.3 Processing of Data. The processing section, in addition to estimating the flow rate from measured transit times, should be capable of rejecting invalid measurements, noise, etc. The indicated flow rate may be the result of one or more individual flow velocity determinations. 2.2.2.4 Displays and Outputs. Most meters have several outputs available, either as standard features or as optional additions to the equipment. Displays may show flow rate, integrated flow volume and/or direction, and may be analog or digital. Signal outputs usually in- clude one or more of the following: current, voltage, dig- ital, and a pulse rate proportional to flow. These outputs may or may not be electrically isolated. Flowmeters may also include alarms and diagnostic aids. 5 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 3 ERROR SOURCES AND THEIR REDUCTION The purpose of this Section is to describe possible er- ror sources for the ultrasonic flowmeters covered by this Standard. Although these errors may not be significant in some cases, they should all be addressed in detail when analyzing the error for a particular flowmeter. 3.1 Axial Velocity Estimate Axial velocity errors are those errors that are made in the determination of Fax across an acoustic path [see Eqs. (5)-(8)]. . 3.1.1 Acoustic Path Length and Angle. The determi- nation of axial flow velocity (Fa) is based on the acous- tic path length (1,) and angle (6). The error in v, is in direct proportion to the uncertainty in the acoustic path length and angle. Acoustic path length and angle errors may be static due to inaccuracies in the initial measure- ments, or they may be dynamic due to changes in the measurement section or, in the case of refractive sys- tems, changes in the index of refraction of the materials in the acoustic path. Errors in the acoustic path .length or angle for nonre- fractive systems can be reduced by accurate geometric and acoustic measurements. For flowmeters in which sound energy undergoes refraction, errors in acoustic path length or angle can be reduced by design and/or compensation based upon knowledge of the speed of sound in the process liquid and intervening materials be- tween the transducer element and the process liquid. In certain applications, compensation for changes in acoustic path length and angle which result from temper- ature or pressure induced pipe deformation may be pro- vided for in either refractive or nonrefractive systems. Systems where the transducers are field mounted can achieve accuracies comparable to systems where the transducers are factory mounted if precise postinstalla- tion measurements are made and the scaling of the elec- tronics is adjusted to reflect these as-built dimensions. 3.1.2 Transit Time 3.1.2.1 Timing. Uncertainty in the transit-time mea- surement due to limits in internal timing accuracy - and resolution lead to a corresponding uncertainty in V,. Errors in the measurement of transit time may be re- duced by the use of stable and accurate high frequency oscillators and averaging many individual transit-time measurements. Transit-time measurement errors are the most amenable of all potential errors to analysis. Transit-time measurement errors due to differences between upstream to downstream and downstream to upstream electronic signal paths may be reduced by MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS using the same detection electronics and transducer pairs for both directions of propagation. 3.1.2.2 Signal Detection. Acoustic transit-time mea- surements may be affected by inconsistencies in recogni- tion of the received acoustic signal caused by variations in received signal level of waveform and noise. (a) Variations in received signal level or waveform can occur as the acoustic properties of the liquid in the measurement section change because of excessive amounts of entrained air, suspended solids, temperature, pressure, etc., or as transducer fouling occurs. These vari- ations may result in uncertainty in determining the tran- sit time, thus causing uncertainty in V,. (b) Noise can affect the accuracy of the transit-time measurement. Noise sources may be either electrical or acoustic, and either external or self-generated. Generally, externally generated electronic or acoustic noise is ran- dom with respect to the received signal. Self-generated acoustic noise, however, is usually synchronized with the received signal and is therefore much harder to compen- sate for in the secondary device. Signal detection errors are reduced by operating with high signal-to-noise ratios. Methods can be provided that will reject those signals which are excessively attenuated or which are distorted by noise. If the background noise is caused by external sources, the signal-to-noise ratio can be improved by increasing the transmitted signal level. However, in many cases, the most troublesome noise is self-generated acoustic noise. This noise generally increases as the level of the trans- mitted signal is increased. The signal-to-noise ratio, in these cases, may be improved by acoustically isolating the transducers from the measurement section by ap- plication of damping materials and/or other suitable techniques. 3.1.3 Sound Speed Dependency. The speed of sound in the liquid and in any intervening materials along the acoustic path varies with composition, temperature, and pressure. Depending upon a particular ultrasonic flow- meter’s design, I,, 8 , and to (f,) [Eqs. (7) and (811 may be affected. In nearly all cases, the errors caused by sound speed variations in the liquid are negligible for a properly im- plemented, nonrefractive, wetted transducer system. Changes in the speed of sound in the intervening ma- terial may, however, require compensation for non- wetted transducer systems. In refractive systems, changes in the speed of sound in intervening materials and the process liquid affect the acoustic path length and angle. It is possible to compen- sate for these effects. In rare cases, changes in the speed 6 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	9	9
3.2.3	Velocity Profile	ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 2.1 Operating Principles 2.1.1 Introduction. At any given instant, the differ- ence between the apparent speed of sound in a moving liquid and the speed of sound in that same liquid at rest is directly proportional to the liquid’s instantaneous velocity. As a consequence, a measure of the average velocity of the liquid along a path can be obtained by transmitting an acoustic pulse along the path and sub- sequently measuring its transit time. The volumetric flow rate of a liquid flowing in a com- pletely filled closed conduit is defined as the average velocity of the liquid over a cross section multiplied by the area of the cross section. Thus, by measuring the average velocity of a liquid along one or more acoustic paths and combining the measurements with knowledge of the cross-sectional area and the velocity profile over the cross section, it is possible to obtain an estimate of the volumetric flow rate of the liquid in the conduit. The theoretical considerations involved in implement- ing these concepts is the subject of this section. 2.1.2 Fluid Velocity Measurement. Several techniques can be used to obtain a measure of the average effective speed of propagation of an acoustic pulse in a moving liquid in-order to determine the average axial flow ve- locity (V,) along an acoustic path. Two approaches, transit-time difference and frequency difference, will be discussed here. 2.1.2.1 Transit-Time Difference. The basis of this technique is the direct measurement of the transit time of acoustic signals as they propagate between a trans- mitter and a receiver, both of which are assumed (see para. 2.1.3) to be in direct contact with the liquid. Dif- ferent transmitter/receiver arrangements are described in para. 2.1.3 below. For an acoustic signal traveling up- stream, the apparent sound speed at any point along the line of transmission, assuming only axial flow, is where C, is the speed of sound in the liquid at rest, 6 is the angle between the acoustic path and V,, and V, is the axial flow velocity at the point in question (see Fig. 1). For a downstream pulse, In the ideal case of plug flow, V,, is constant through- out the liquid and the acoustic path is a straight line, i.e., 0 = constant = 8, (path angle for fluid at rest). MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Consequently, Cup and CdO- are both constants along the acoustic path. In this case the upstream and down- stream transit times(tup, tdo-) are given respectively by: tup = (3) c, ++ - v, cos eo and (4) sin’ e, + V , cos e, where 1, is the straight line distance between the centers of the faces of the acoustic transmitter and receiver. Taking the difference between the reciprocals of these transit times leads to 1 1 2va, cos e, - tdown tup IO and, on rearranging, to where At = tup - tdown. Since v,, is constant, v, = v,, (the average flow velocity). This analysis becomes more complicated in the ab- sence of plug flow. Nevertheless, to the degree that (Vax/Co)&ax. << 1, the result for the average of the axial liquid velocity along the acoustic path (v,) is identical (see Appendix A), i.e., - 2.1.2.2 Frequency Difference. In a frequency differ- ence measurement approach, the reception of an acous- tic signal at the receiver is used as a reference for gener- ating a subsequent acoustic signal at the transmitter. Assuming no delays other than the propagation time of the acoustic pulses in the liquid, the frequency at which the pulses are generated or received is proportional to the reciprocal of their transit time. The equations derived in the previous paragraph are equally valid in this case, the 2 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD transit time being replaced by the reciprocal of a con- 2.1.4 Estimating Volumetric Flow. Once the average stant (Kf) times the frequencies, i.e., axial flow velocity along an acoustic path has been found, the volumetric flow rate can be calculated from - Kf 10 the following equation: v, = (fdown - fup) (6) 2 cos eo n 2.1.3 Transducer Considerations. In the preceding paragraph it was assumed that the transducer element was in direct contact with the liquid and that the acous- tic signal was propagated normal to the transducer/liquid interface. In most’ cases it is desirable to protect the transducer element from the process liquid by using in- tervening materials (see Figs. 2 and 3). If such an ar- rangement is employed, Eq. (5) takes the following form: where to, a function of temperature, is the transit time of the acoustic signals in the intervening materials. The equation appropriate to the frequency difference technique must also be modified: where fo is equal to 1 /to. Use of an intervening material also allows the possibil- ity of acoustic signals entering and leaving the liquid along a path that is not normal to the solid/liquid inter- face. For example, the intervening material could be flush with the inside surface of the conduit as in Fig. 4. This further complicates the acoustic analysis.since not only the corrections mentioned above, but also correc- tions for the refraction of the acoustic signals at the solid/liquid interface must be introduced. This refraction takes place according to Snell’s Law, i.e., where C is the sound speed in the liquid and Cp is the sound speed in the intervening material. As a conse- quence, 0 and to (f,) in Eqs. (7) and (8) now become functions of the sound speeds (C, Cp), and hence, in gen- eral, of the temperature, pressure, and composition of the process fluid and intervening materials. where: A = the average cross-sectional area of the measure- ment section (L*) Q = the volumetric flow rate in the measurement section (L3/t) S = a velocity profile correction factor (dimension- less) v,i = the average axial flow velocity along acoustic path i(L/t) Wi = a weighting factor for acoustic path i that is de- pendent on measurement section geometry and acoustic path location (dimensionless) Note that increasing n can reduce the sensitivity of S to flow profiie variations. n = the number of acoustic paths 2.2 Implementation 2.2.1 Primary Device. The primary device consists of a separate spool piece with transducers installed, or an existing section of conduit to which transducers are in- stalled in the field. 2.2.1.1 Measurement Section. The section of con- duit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals is called the measurement section. This section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section located at the extreme up- stream and downstream transducer positions. The mea- surement section is usually circular in cross section; how- ever, it may be square, rectangular, elliptical, or some other shape. 2.2.1.2 Transducers. The transducers transmit and receive acoustic energy. They may be factory rtlounted or field mounted by clamping, threading, or bonding. Transducers may be wetted by the liquid or be non- wetted. Wetted transducers may be flush mounted, re- cessed, or protrude into the flow stream. Some non- wetted transducers may be removed while the line is in service. 2.2.1.3 Acoustic Paths. There may be one (single path) or more (multipath) acoustic paths in the measure- ment section, each having a pair of transducers. Common 3 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Upstream transducer element Downstream transducer element I I MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Intervening material \ \ \ I Measurement I section FIG. 3 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH PROTRUSIONS FIG. 1 WETTED TRANSDUCER CONFIGURATION Intervening material '\ \ Intervening material L?\ FIG. 2 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH FIG. 4 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH CAVITIES SMOOTH BORE 4 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIl-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Single Path Axial Multipath ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Diametric Chordal Chordal Diametric .FIG. 5 ACOUSTIC PATH CONFIGURATIONS types are axial, diametric, and chordal, as shown in Fig. 5. 2.2.2 Secondary Device. The secondary device com- prises the electronic equipment required to operate the transducers, make the measurements, process the mea- sured data, and display or record the results. 2.2.2.1 Operation of Transducers. Transducers may be excited simultaneously or alternately with one or more transmissions in each direction. The acoustic fre- quency and pulse repetition rate may vary. The intercon- necting cable lengths between the secondary and pri- mary devices are an important consideration, and their maximum length is usually defined by the manufacturer. 2.2.2.2 Measurement Method. The transit time of an acoustic pulse is usually taken to be the time interval between initial excitation of the transmitter and some characteristic point of the received signal. Exact details vary from one manufacturer to another. 2.2.2.3 Processing of Data. The processing section, in addition to estimating the flow rate from measured transit times, should be capable of rejecting invalid measurements, noise, etc. The indicated flow rate may be the result of one or more individual flow velocity determinations. 2.2.2.4 Displays and Outputs. Most meters have several outputs available, either as standard features or as optional additions to the equipment. Displays may show flow rate, integrated flow volume and/or direction, and may be analog or digital. Signal outputs usually in- clude one or more of the following: current, voltage, dig- ital, and a pulse rate proportional to flow. These outputs may or may not be electrically isolated. Flowmeters may also include alarms and diagnostic aids. 5 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 3 ERROR SOURCES AND THEIR REDUCTION The purpose of this Section is to describe possible er- ror sources for the ultrasonic flowmeters covered by this Standard. Although these errors may not be significant in some cases, they should all be addressed in detail when analyzing the error for a particular flowmeter. 3.1 Axial Velocity Estimate Axial velocity errors are those errors that are made in the determination of Fax across an acoustic path [see Eqs. (5)-(8)]. . 3.1.1 Acoustic Path Length and Angle. The determi- nation of axial flow velocity (Fa) is based on the acous- tic path length (1,) and angle (6). The error in v, is in direct proportion to the uncertainty in the acoustic path length and angle. Acoustic path length and angle errors may be static due to inaccuracies in the initial measure- ments, or they may be dynamic due to changes in the measurement section or, in the case of refractive sys- tems, changes in the index of refraction of the materials in the acoustic path. Errors in the acoustic path .length or angle for nonre- fractive systems can be reduced by accurate geometric and acoustic measurements. For flowmeters in which sound energy undergoes refraction, errors in acoustic path length or angle can be reduced by design and/or compensation based upon knowledge of the speed of sound in the process liquid and intervening materials be- tween the transducer element and the process liquid. In certain applications, compensation for changes in acoustic path length and angle which result from temper- ature or pressure induced pipe deformation may be pro- vided for in either refractive or nonrefractive systems. Systems where the transducers are field mounted can achieve accuracies comparable to systems where the transducers are factory mounted if precise postinstalla- tion measurements are made and the scaling of the elec- tronics is adjusted to reflect these as-built dimensions. 3.1.2 Transit Time 3.1.2.1 Timing. Uncertainty in the transit-time mea- surement due to limits in internal timing accuracy - and resolution lead to a corresponding uncertainty in V,. Errors in the measurement of transit time may be re- duced by the use of stable and accurate high frequency oscillators and averaging many individual transit-time measurements. Transit-time measurement errors are the most amenable of all potential errors to analysis. Transit-time measurement errors due to differences between upstream to downstream and downstream to upstream electronic signal paths may be reduced by MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS using the same detection electronics and transducer pairs for both directions of propagation. 3.1.2.2 Signal Detection. Acoustic transit-time mea- surements may be affected by inconsistencies in recogni- tion of the received acoustic signal caused by variations in received signal level of waveform and noise. (a) Variations in received signal level or waveform can occur as the acoustic properties of the liquid in the measurement section change because of excessive amounts of entrained air, suspended solids, temperature, pressure, etc., or as transducer fouling occurs. These vari- ations may result in uncertainty in determining the tran- sit time, thus causing uncertainty in V,. (b) Noise can affect the accuracy of the transit-time measurement. Noise sources may be either electrical or acoustic, and either external or self-generated. Generally, externally generated electronic or acoustic noise is ran- dom with respect to the received signal. Self-generated acoustic noise, however, is usually synchronized with the received signal and is therefore much harder to compen- sate for in the secondary device. Signal detection errors are reduced by operating with high signal-to-noise ratios. Methods can be provided that will reject those signals which are excessively attenuated or which are distorted by noise. If the background noise is caused by external sources, the signal-to-noise ratio can be improved by increasing the transmitted signal level. However, in many cases, the most troublesome noise is self-generated acoustic noise. This noise generally increases as the level of the trans- mitted signal is increased. The signal-to-noise ratio, in these cases, may be improved by acoustically isolating the transducers from the measurement section by ap- plication of damping materials and/or other suitable techniques. 3.1.3 Sound Speed Dependency. The speed of sound in the liquid and in any intervening materials along the acoustic path varies with composition, temperature, and pressure. Depending upon a particular ultrasonic flow- meter’s design, I,, 8 , and to (f,) [Eqs. (7) and (811 may be affected. In nearly all cases, the errors caused by sound speed variations in the liquid are negligible for a properly im- plemented, nonrefractive, wetted transducer system. Changes in the speed of sound in the intervening ma- terial may, however, require compensation for non- wetted transducer systems. In refractive systems, changes in the speed of sound in intervening materials and the process liquid affect the acoustic path length and angle. It is possible to compen- sate for these effects. In rare cases, changes in the speed 6 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	8	8
3.3	Computation	MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD / / \ / \ FIG. 6 A TYPICAL CROSS PATH ULTRASONIC FLOWMETER CONFIGURATION (PATHS MAY BE MULTIPATH DIAMETRIC OR CHORDAL) of sound in the liquid may refract the beam so much that it misses the opposing transducer. Accurate knowl- edge of the speed of sound in a particular liquid can reduce this possibility. 3.1.4 Secondary Flow. Secondary flow can produce an error in the determination of v, since it is normally assumed in the calculations that all flow is in the axial direction. Secondary flow is a result of flow perturba- tions occurring upstream or downstream of the measure- ment section because of devices such as elbows, valves, and pumps. Secondary flow may result in an error in determining - the transit time which ultimately affects The most effective way to reduce secondary flow er- rors is to avoid installations where severe secondary flow exists. Reduction of secondary flow may require long, straight runs of pipe and/or the use of flow straighteners, depending upon the nature of the secondary flow source and the accuracy required. Secondary flow errors can also be reduced by the use of an appropriate acoustic path orientation or by computing line velocities on ap- propriate multiple acoustic paths, i.e., crossed paths as illustrated in Fig. 6 , and averaging. vu. 3.2 Integration Integration error is the error in the flow rate estimate which occurs in the computation of the flow rate from Fa,, A , S, and Wi as shown in Eq. (10). 3.2.1 Cross Section Dimensional Errors. Error in the assumed cross-sectional area of the measurement section causes an error in the flow rate estimate. This error may be due to initial measurement section shape irregularities, such as out-of-roundness; or it may be due to changes in the initial shape caused by temperature, pressure, or structural loading. It may also be due to the formation of deposits or growths, such as algae,'in the measurement section. Usually it is due to combinations of the items mentioned above. Cross section dimensional errors can be reduced by manufacturing or choosing a measurement section which has constant dimensions along its length, can be accu- rately measured, and has a stable surface so that cross section changes with time due to corrosion, material buildup, or loss of protective coatings will be small. Additionally, if temperatures or pressures are expected to be substantially different from reference conditions, it may be necessary to adjust the measured dimensions to compensate for dimensional changes that may occur under operating conditions. In circular pipes, cross section dimensional errors can be reduced by minimizing the effects of out-of-roundness through averaging of diameter measurements made at the upstream, middle, and downstream ends of the mea- surement section. The measurement section should be inspected period- ically to determine if the dimensional factor should be adjusted to compensate for observed changes. 3.22 Acoustic Path Location. T h e acoustic path lo- cation, particularly in multipath flowmeters, is an impor- tant contributor to overall flowmeter accuracy. The un- certainty in the position of the acoustic path can cause errors through improper assignment of a weighting fac- tor (Wi) and by causing unnecessary sensitivity of i, to the velocity profile through nonoptimum placement of transducers. Errors due to acoustic path location can be reduced by suitable manufacturing techniques in the case of a prefabricated measurement section or by accurately determining the acoustic path for systems where the transducers are field mounted. Path locations can be 7 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	13	13
3.4	Calibration	ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD determined in a variety of ways, but probably the most accurate involves optical determination of both the acoustic path location and angle within the measurement section. 3.2.3 Velocity Profile. Ultrasonic flowmeters are af- fected by variations in flow profile because uncertainty in the velocity profile causes an error in that may not be compensated for by the velocity profile correc- tion factor S. This error may affect both the linearity and the value of the flow rate estimate. Velocity profile variations can be caused by changes in flow rate (both transient and steady state), wall roughness, temperature, viscosity, upstream or downstream hydraulic conditions, transducer projections, and transducer cavities. In the absence of upstream and downstream hydraulic effects, the Reynolds number and friction factor of the measure- ment section would be sufficient to determine the veloc- ity profile correction factor S. There usually is a difference between the actual ve- locity profile and that assumed in the flowmeter’s com- putations. Since most flowmeter computations assume a fully developed velocity profile, errors can be reduced by placing the measurement section as far as possible from bends, valves, tees, transitions, etc. These errors can also be reduced by using a more accurate model of the actual velocity profile, or in general, by increasing the number of acoustic paths. 3.3 Computation There is a degree of error associated with the compu- tations made by the electronic circuits because of the finite limits in processing accuracies. However, this error will normally be negligible. Computation errors due to electronics malfunction can be reduced by using built-in, self-checking features in the processor. 3.4 Calibration Calibration is an alternative means for reducing errors resulting from uncertainties in path length and angle, cross section, and path location. Velocity profile errors can be corrected with in situ calibration or by properly simulated laboratory calibrations. There is an uncertainty in the flow rate estimate that results from errors .involved in the procedure used to calibrate an ultrasonic flowmeter. To reduce calibration uncertainty, calibration should be conducted according to national (ANSI) or international (ISO) standards. MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 3.5 Equipment Degradation Performance errors may arise due to fouling or phys- ical degradation of the equipment. Equipment design should include reasonable tolerance to changes in com- ponent values and process conditions. The equipment should also indicate when degradation of flowmeter performance occurs. The probability of error can be reduced considerably by including suitable self-test or diagnostic circuits in the equipment. 4 APPLICATION GUIDELINES 4.1 Performance Parameters By evaluating the performance parameters listed below, a user should be better able to predict the per- formance of a given ultrasonic flowmeter in a specific application, as well as compare its performance to other ultrasonic flowmeters. These parameters are limited to those which can be substantiated by test or well- established computational methods. (It should be em- phasized that the following performance parameters are normally determined by the manufacturer under specific reference conditions that will, in general, differ from the user’s actual conditions.) Subjective or nonperformance parameters, such as convenience of installation, reliabil- ity, and cost, are left to the individual user for evalua- tion. In each case below, the range and conditions ap- plicable to each parameter should be specified. 4.1.1 Accuracy. Accuracy describes the uncertainty of a measured value as compared to its true value and is commonly reported as a percentage of actual flow, spap, or full scale. The preferred method is to specify the max- imum deviation (in percent) between measured flow and actual flow (see also ANSI/ASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes). 4.1.2 Linearity. The data obtained by test of any in- strument consists of points scattered around a smooth curve that represents the nominal characteristic of the instrument. Linearity is the maximum deviation, at any flow rate, of that smooth curve from a least squares lin- ear fit to the data and should be reported as a percentage of that flow rate. 4.1.3 Repeatability. Repeatability is the ability of a flowmeter to return to a previously indicated flow rate after a deviation in either direction from and return to the flow conditions which caused that indicated flow rate. It also includes readout variations under constant flow conditions. Repeatability should be reported as the maximum expected deviation between these indicated flow rates expressed as a percentage of the flow rate 8 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	14	14
3.5	Equipment Degradation	ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD determined in a variety of ways, but probably the most accurate involves optical determination of both the acoustic path location and angle within the measurement section. 3.2.3 Velocity Profile. Ultrasonic flowmeters are af- fected by variations in flow profile because uncertainty in the velocity profile causes an error in that may not be compensated for by the velocity profile correc- tion factor S. This error may affect both the linearity and the value of the flow rate estimate. Velocity profile variations can be caused by changes in flow rate (both transient and steady state), wall roughness, temperature, viscosity, upstream or downstream hydraulic conditions, transducer projections, and transducer cavities. In the absence of upstream and downstream hydraulic effects, the Reynolds number and friction factor of the measure- ment section would be sufficient to determine the veloc- ity profile correction factor S. There usually is a difference between the actual ve- locity profile and that assumed in the flowmeter’s com- putations. Since most flowmeter computations assume a fully developed velocity profile, errors can be reduced by placing the measurement section as far as possible from bends, valves, tees, transitions, etc. These errors can also be reduced by using a more accurate model of the actual velocity profile, or in general, by increasing the number of acoustic paths. 3.3 Computation There is a degree of error associated with the compu- tations made by the electronic circuits because of the finite limits in processing accuracies. However, this error will normally be negligible. Computation errors due to electronics malfunction can be reduced by using built-in, self-checking features in the processor. 3.4 Calibration Calibration is an alternative means for reducing errors resulting from uncertainties in path length and angle, cross section, and path location. Velocity profile errors can be corrected with in situ calibration or by properly simulated laboratory calibrations. There is an uncertainty in the flow rate estimate that results from errors .involved in the procedure used to calibrate an ultrasonic flowmeter. To reduce calibration uncertainty, calibration should be conducted according to national (ANSI) or international (ISO) standards. MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 3.5 Equipment Degradation Performance errors may arise due to fouling or phys- ical degradation of the equipment. Equipment design should include reasonable tolerance to changes in com- ponent values and process conditions. The equipment should also indicate when degradation of flowmeter performance occurs. The probability of error can be reduced considerably by including suitable self-test or diagnostic circuits in the equipment. 4 APPLICATION GUIDELINES 4.1 Performance Parameters By evaluating the performance parameters listed below, a user should be better able to predict the per- formance of a given ultrasonic flowmeter in a specific application, as well as compare its performance to other ultrasonic flowmeters. These parameters are limited to those which can be substantiated by test or well- established computational methods. (It should be em- phasized that the following performance parameters are normally determined by the manufacturer under specific reference conditions that will, in general, differ from the user’s actual conditions.) Subjective or nonperformance parameters, such as convenience of installation, reliabil- ity, and cost, are left to the individual user for evalua- tion. In each case below, the range and conditions ap- plicable to each parameter should be specified. 4.1.1 Accuracy. Accuracy describes the uncertainty of a measured value as compared to its true value and is commonly reported as a percentage of actual flow, spap, or full scale. The preferred method is to specify the max- imum deviation (in percent) between measured flow and actual flow (see also ANSI/ASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes). 4.1.2 Linearity. The data obtained by test of any in- strument consists of points scattered around a smooth curve that represents the nominal characteristic of the instrument. Linearity is the maximum deviation, at any flow rate, of that smooth curve from a least squares lin- ear fit to the data and should be reported as a percentage of that flow rate. 4.1.3 Repeatability. Repeatability is the ability of a flowmeter to return to a previously indicated flow rate after a deviation in either direction from and return to the flow conditions which caused that indicated flow rate. It also includes readout variations under constant flow conditions. Repeatability should be reported as the maximum expected deviation between these indicated flow rates expressed as a percentage of the flow rate 8 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	14	14
4	Application Guidelines	CONTENTS ... Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111 Committee Roster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v 1 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2 Flowmeter Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 3 Error Sources and Their Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 4 Application Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 5 Meter Factor Determination and Verification .......................... 9 Figures 1 Wetted Transducer Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2 Protected Configuration With Cavities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 3 Protected Configuration With Protrusions ............................. 4 4 Protected Configuration With Smooth Bore ............................ 4 5 Acoustic Path Configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 6 A Typical Cross Path Ultrasonic Flowmeter Configuration (Paths May Be Multipath Diametric or Chordal) ............................ 7 Appendices A Acoustic Transit Time in a Nonuniform Fluid Velocity Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 B Selection Guidelines ........................................... 14 vii Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 1 GENERAL 1.1 Scope This Standard applies only to ultrasonic flowmeters that base their operation on the measurement of transit times of acoustic signals. Further, this Standard concerns only the application of such meters when used to mea- sure the volumetric flow rate of a liquid exhibiting homogeneous acoustic properties and flowing in a com- pletely fdled closed conduit. Not covered by this Standard are ultrasonic flow- meters that derive volumetric flow rate from measure- ments of the deviation, scattering (Doppler flowmeter), or correlation of acoustic signals. 1.2 Purpose This Standard provides: (a) a description of the operating principles employed (b) a description of error sources and performance (c) a common set of terminology, symbols, defini- by the ultrasonic flowmeters covered in this Standard; verification procedures; tions, and specifications. 1.3 Terminology, Symbols, and Definitions Terminology and symbols used in this Standard, except for those defined below, are in accordance with ANWASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes. acoustic path - the path that the acoustic signals follow as they propagate through the measurement section be- tween the transducer elements axid flow velocity (Vax) - the component of liquid flow velocity at a point in the measurement section that is parallel to the measurement section’s axis and in the direction of the flow being measured cross flow velocity - the component of liquid flow ve- locity at a point in the measurement section that is per- pendicular to the measurement section’s axis measurement section - the section of conduit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals. The measurement section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section and lo- cated at the extreme upstream and downstream trans- ducer positions. nonrefractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid inter- faces at a right angle refractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid interfaces at other than a right angle transducer - the combination of the transducer element and passive materials transducer element - an active component that pro- duces either acoustic output in response to an electric stimulus and/or an electric output in response to an acoustic stimulus transit time (t) - the time required for an acoustic signal to traverse an acoustic path velocity profire correction factor (S) - a dimensionless factor based on measured knowledge of the velocity pro- file used to adjust the meter output 2 FLOWMETER DESCRIPTION The transit-time ultrasonic flowmeter being con- sidered in this Standard is a complete system composed of the primary device, which is a measurement section with one or more pairs of transducers, and the secondary device, which is the electronic equipment necessary to operate the transducers, make the measurements, pro- cess the measured data, and display or record results. 1 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 2.1 Operating Principles 2.1.1 Introduction. At any given instant, the differ- ence between the apparent speed of sound in a moving liquid and the speed of sound in that same liquid at rest is directly proportional to the liquid’s instantaneous velocity. As a consequence, a measure of the average velocity of the liquid along a path can be obtained by transmitting an acoustic pulse along the path and sub- sequently measuring its transit time. The volumetric flow rate of a liquid flowing in a com- pletely filled closed conduit is defined as the average velocity of the liquid over a cross section multiplied by the area of the cross section. Thus, by measuring the average velocity of a liquid along one or more acoustic paths and combining the measurements with knowledge of the cross-sectional area and the velocity profile over the cross section, it is possible to obtain an estimate of the volumetric flow rate of the liquid in the conduit. The theoretical considerations involved in implement- ing these concepts is the subject of this section. 2.1.2 Fluid Velocity Measurement. Several techniques can be used to obtain a measure of the average effective speed of propagation of an acoustic pulse in a moving liquid in-order to determine the average axial flow ve- locity (V,) along an acoustic path. Two approaches, transit-time difference and frequency difference, will be discussed here. 2.1.2.1 Transit-Time Difference. The basis of this technique is the direct measurement of the transit time of acoustic signals as they propagate between a trans- mitter and a receiver, both of which are assumed (see para. 2.1.3) to be in direct contact with the liquid. Dif- ferent transmitter/receiver arrangements are described in para. 2.1.3 below. For an acoustic signal traveling up- stream, the apparent sound speed at any point along the line of transmission, assuming only axial flow, is where C, is the speed of sound in the liquid at rest, 6 is the angle between the acoustic path and V,, and V, is the axial flow velocity at the point in question (see Fig. 1). For a downstream pulse, In the ideal case of plug flow, V,, is constant through- out the liquid and the acoustic path is a straight line, i.e., 0 = constant = 8, (path angle for fluid at rest). MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Consequently, Cup and CdO- are both constants along the acoustic path. In this case the upstream and down- stream transit times(tup, tdo-) are given respectively by: tup = (3) c, ++ - v, cos eo and (4) sin’ e, + V , cos e, where 1, is the straight line distance between the centers of the faces of the acoustic transmitter and receiver. Taking the difference between the reciprocals of these transit times leads to 1 1 2va, cos e, - tdown tup IO and, on rearranging, to where At = tup - tdown. Since v,, is constant, v, = v,, (the average flow velocity). This analysis becomes more complicated in the ab- sence of plug flow. Nevertheless, to the degree that (Vax/Co)&ax. << 1, the result for the average of the axial liquid velocity along the acoustic path (v,) is identical (see Appendix A), i.e., - 2.1.2.2 Frequency Difference. In a frequency differ- ence measurement approach, the reception of an acous- tic signal at the receiver is used as a reference for gener- ating a subsequent acoustic signal at the transmitter. Assuming no delays other than the propagation time of the acoustic pulses in the liquid, the frequency at which the pulses are generated or received is proportional to the reciprocal of their transit time. The equations derived in the previous paragraph are equally valid in this case, the 2 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD transit time being replaced by the reciprocal of a con- 2.1.4 Estimating Volumetric Flow. Once the average stant (Kf) times the frequencies, i.e., axial flow velocity along an acoustic path has been found, the volumetric flow rate can be calculated from - Kf 10 the following equation: v, = (fdown - fup) (6) 2 cos eo n 2.1.3 Transducer Considerations. In the preceding paragraph it was assumed that the transducer element was in direct contact with the liquid and that the acous- tic signal was propagated normal to the transducer/liquid interface. In most’ cases it is desirable to protect the transducer element from the process liquid by using in- tervening materials (see Figs. 2 and 3). If such an ar- rangement is employed, Eq. (5) takes the following form: where to, a function of temperature, is the transit time of the acoustic signals in the intervening materials. The equation appropriate to the frequency difference technique must also be modified: where fo is equal to 1 /to. Use of an intervening material also allows the possibil- ity of acoustic signals entering and leaving the liquid along a path that is not normal to the solid/liquid inter- face. For example, the intervening material could be flush with the inside surface of the conduit as in Fig. 4. This further complicates the acoustic analysis.since not only the corrections mentioned above, but also correc- tions for the refraction of the acoustic signals at the solid/liquid interface must be introduced. This refraction takes place according to Snell’s Law, i.e., where C is the sound speed in the liquid and Cp is the sound speed in the intervening material. As a conse- quence, 0 and to (f,) in Eqs. (7) and (8) now become functions of the sound speeds (C, Cp), and hence, in gen- eral, of the temperature, pressure, and composition of the process fluid and intervening materials. where: A = the average cross-sectional area of the measure- ment section (L*) Q = the volumetric flow rate in the measurement section (L3/t) S = a velocity profile correction factor (dimension- less) v,i = the average axial flow velocity along acoustic path i(L/t) Wi = a weighting factor for acoustic path i that is de- pendent on measurement section geometry and acoustic path location (dimensionless) Note that increasing n can reduce the sensitivity of S to flow profiie variations. n = the number of acoustic paths 2.2 Implementation 2.2.1 Primary Device. The primary device consists of a separate spool piece with transducers installed, or an existing section of conduit to which transducers are in- stalled in the field. 2.2.1.1 Measurement Section. The section of con- duit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals is called the measurement section. This section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section located at the extreme up- stream and downstream transducer positions. The mea- surement section is usually circular in cross section; how- ever, it may be square, rectangular, elliptical, or some other shape. 2.2.1.2 Transducers. The transducers transmit and receive acoustic energy. They may be factory rtlounted or field mounted by clamping, threading, or bonding. Transducers may be wetted by the liquid or be non- wetted. Wetted transducers may be flush mounted, re- cessed, or protrude into the flow stream. Some non- wetted transducers may be removed while the line is in service. 2.2.1.3 Acoustic Paths. There may be one (single path) or more (multipath) acoustic paths in the measure- ment section, each having a pair of transducers. Common 3 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Upstream transducer element Downstream transducer element I I MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Intervening material \ \ \ I Measurement I section FIG. 3 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH PROTRUSIONS FIG. 1 WETTED TRANSDUCER CONFIGURATION Intervening material '\ \ Intervening material L?\ FIG. 2 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH FIG. 4 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH CAVITIES SMOOTH BORE 4 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIl-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Single Path Axial Multipath ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Diametric Chordal Chordal Diametric .FIG. 5 ACOUSTIC PATH CONFIGURATIONS types are axial, diametric, and chordal, as shown in Fig. 5. 2.2.2 Secondary Device. The secondary device com- prises the electronic equipment required to operate the transducers, make the measurements, process the mea- sured data, and display or record the results. 2.2.2.1 Operation of Transducers. Transducers may be excited simultaneously or alternately with one or more transmissions in each direction. The acoustic fre- quency and pulse repetition rate may vary. The intercon- necting cable lengths between the secondary and pri- mary devices are an important consideration, and their maximum length is usually defined by the manufacturer. 2.2.2.2 Measurement Method. The transit time of an acoustic pulse is usually taken to be the time interval between initial excitation of the transmitter and some characteristic point of the received signal. Exact details vary from one manufacturer to another. 2.2.2.3 Processing of Data. The processing section, in addition to estimating the flow rate from measured transit times, should be capable of rejecting invalid measurements, noise, etc. The indicated flow rate may be the result of one or more individual flow velocity determinations. 2.2.2.4 Displays and Outputs. Most meters have several outputs available, either as standard features or as optional additions to the equipment. Displays may show flow rate, integrated flow volume and/or direction, and may be analog or digital. Signal outputs usually in- clude one or more of the following: current, voltage, dig- ital, and a pulse rate proportional to flow. These outputs may or may not be electrically isolated. Flowmeters may also include alarms and diagnostic aids. 5 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 3 ERROR SOURCES AND THEIR REDUCTION The purpose of this Section is to describe possible er- ror sources for the ultrasonic flowmeters covered by this Standard. Although these errors may not be significant in some cases, they should all be addressed in detail when analyzing the error for a particular flowmeter. 3.1 Axial Velocity Estimate Axial velocity errors are those errors that are made in the determination of Fax across an acoustic path [see Eqs. (5)-(8)]. . 3.1.1 Acoustic Path Length and Angle. The determi- nation of axial flow velocity (Fa) is based on the acous- tic path length (1,) and angle (6). The error in v, is in direct proportion to the uncertainty in the acoustic path length and angle. Acoustic path length and angle errors may be static due to inaccuracies in the initial measure- ments, or they may be dynamic due to changes in the measurement section or, in the case of refractive sys- tems, changes in the index of refraction of the materials in the acoustic path. Errors in the acoustic path .length or angle for nonre- fractive systems can be reduced by accurate geometric and acoustic measurements. For flowmeters in which sound energy undergoes refraction, errors in acoustic path length or angle can be reduced by design and/or compensation based upon knowledge of the speed of sound in the process liquid and intervening materials be- tween the transducer element and the process liquid. In certain applications, compensation for changes in acoustic path length and angle which result from temper- ature or pressure induced pipe deformation may be pro- vided for in either refractive or nonrefractive systems. Systems where the transducers are field mounted can achieve accuracies comparable to systems where the transducers are factory mounted if precise postinstalla- tion measurements are made and the scaling of the elec- tronics is adjusted to reflect these as-built dimensions. 3.1.2 Transit Time 3.1.2.1 Timing. Uncertainty in the transit-time mea- surement due to limits in internal timing accuracy - and resolution lead to a corresponding uncertainty in V,. Errors in the measurement of transit time may be re- duced by the use of stable and accurate high frequency oscillators and averaging many individual transit-time measurements. Transit-time measurement errors are the most amenable of all potential errors to analysis. Transit-time measurement errors due to differences between upstream to downstream and downstream to upstream electronic signal paths may be reduced by MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS using the same detection electronics and transducer pairs for both directions of propagation. 3.1.2.2 Signal Detection. Acoustic transit-time mea- surements may be affected by inconsistencies in recogni- tion of the received acoustic signal caused by variations in received signal level of waveform and noise. (a) Variations in received signal level or waveform can occur as the acoustic properties of the liquid in the measurement section change because of excessive amounts of entrained air, suspended solids, temperature, pressure, etc., or as transducer fouling occurs. These vari- ations may result in uncertainty in determining the tran- sit time, thus causing uncertainty in V,. (b) Noise can affect the accuracy of the transit-time measurement. Noise sources may be either electrical or acoustic, and either external or self-generated. Generally, externally generated electronic or acoustic noise is ran- dom with respect to the received signal. Self-generated acoustic noise, however, is usually synchronized with the received signal and is therefore much harder to compen- sate for in the secondary device. Signal detection errors are reduced by operating with high signal-to-noise ratios. Methods can be provided that will reject those signals which are excessively attenuated or which are distorted by noise. If the background noise is caused by external sources, the signal-to-noise ratio can be improved by increasing the transmitted signal level. However, in many cases, the most troublesome noise is self-generated acoustic noise. This noise generally increases as the level of the trans- mitted signal is increased. The signal-to-noise ratio, in these cases, may be improved by acoustically isolating the transducers from the measurement section by ap- plication of damping materials and/or other suitable techniques. 3.1.3 Sound Speed Dependency. The speed of sound in the liquid and in any intervening materials along the acoustic path varies with composition, temperature, and pressure. Depending upon a particular ultrasonic flow- meter’s design, I,, 8 , and to (f,) [Eqs. (7) and (811 may be affected. In nearly all cases, the errors caused by sound speed variations in the liquid are negligible for a properly im- plemented, nonrefractive, wetted transducer system. Changes in the speed of sound in the intervening ma- terial may, however, require compensation for non- wetted transducer systems. In refractive systems, changes in the speed of sound in intervening materials and the process liquid affect the acoustic path length and angle. It is possible to compen- sate for these effects. In rare cases, changes in the speed 6 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD / / \ / \ FIG. 6 A TYPICAL CROSS PATH ULTRASONIC FLOWMETER CONFIGURATION (PATHS MAY BE MULTIPATH DIAMETRIC OR CHORDAL) of sound in the liquid may refract the beam so much that it misses the opposing transducer. Accurate knowl- edge of the speed of sound in a particular liquid can reduce this possibility. 3.1.4 Secondary Flow. Secondary flow can produce an error in the determination of v, since it is normally assumed in the calculations that all flow is in the axial direction. Secondary flow is a result of flow perturba- tions occurring upstream or downstream of the measure- ment section because of devices such as elbows, valves, and pumps. Secondary flow may result in an error in determining - the transit time which ultimately affects The most effective way to reduce secondary flow er- rors is to avoid installations where severe secondary flow exists. Reduction of secondary flow may require long, straight runs of pipe and/or the use of flow straighteners, depending upon the nature of the secondary flow source and the accuracy required. Secondary flow errors can also be reduced by the use of an appropriate acoustic path orientation or by computing line velocities on ap- propriate multiple acoustic paths, i.e., crossed paths as illustrated in Fig. 6 , and averaging. vu. 3.2 Integration Integration error is the error in the flow rate estimate which occurs in the computation of the flow rate from Fa,, A , S, and Wi as shown in Eq. (10). 3.2.1 Cross Section Dimensional Errors. Error in the assumed cross-sectional area of the measurement section causes an error in the flow rate estimate. This error may be due to initial measurement section shape irregularities, such as out-of-roundness; or it may be due to changes in the initial shape caused by temperature, pressure, or structural loading. It may also be due to the formation of deposits or growths, such as algae,'in the measurement section. Usually it is due to combinations of the items mentioned above. Cross section dimensional errors can be reduced by manufacturing or choosing a measurement section which has constant dimensions along its length, can be accu- rately measured, and has a stable surface so that cross section changes with time due to corrosion, material buildup, or loss of protective coatings will be small. Additionally, if temperatures or pressures are expected to be substantially different from reference conditions, it may be necessary to adjust the measured dimensions to compensate for dimensional changes that may occur under operating conditions. In circular pipes, cross section dimensional errors can be reduced by minimizing the effects of out-of-roundness through averaging of diameter measurements made at the upstream, middle, and downstream ends of the mea- surement section. The measurement section should be inspected period- ically to determine if the dimensional factor should be adjusted to compensate for observed changes. 3.22 Acoustic Path Location. T h e acoustic path lo- cation, particularly in multipath flowmeters, is an impor- tant contributor to overall flowmeter accuracy. The un- certainty in the position of the acoustic path can cause errors through improper assignment of a weighting fac- tor (Wi) and by causing unnecessary sensitivity of i, to the velocity profile through nonoptimum placement of transducers. Errors due to acoustic path location can be reduced by suitable manufacturing techniques in the case of a prefabricated measurement section or by accurately determining the acoustic path for systems where the transducers are field mounted. Path locations can be 7 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	6	6
4.1	Performance Parameters	ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD determined in a variety of ways, but probably the most accurate involves optical determination of both the acoustic path location and angle within the measurement section. 3.2.3 Velocity Profile. Ultrasonic flowmeters are af- fected by variations in flow profile because uncertainty in the velocity profile causes an error in that may not be compensated for by the velocity profile correc- tion factor S. This error may affect both the linearity and the value of the flow rate estimate. Velocity profile variations can be caused by changes in flow rate (both transient and steady state), wall roughness, temperature, viscosity, upstream or downstream hydraulic conditions, transducer projections, and transducer cavities. In the absence of upstream and downstream hydraulic effects, the Reynolds number and friction factor of the measure- ment section would be sufficient to determine the veloc- ity profile correction factor S. There usually is a difference between the actual ve- locity profile and that assumed in the flowmeter’s com- putations. Since most flowmeter computations assume a fully developed velocity profile, errors can be reduced by placing the measurement section as far as possible from bends, valves, tees, transitions, etc. These errors can also be reduced by using a more accurate model of the actual velocity profile, or in general, by increasing the number of acoustic paths. 3.3 Computation There is a degree of error associated with the compu- tations made by the electronic circuits because of the finite limits in processing accuracies. However, this error will normally be negligible. Computation errors due to electronics malfunction can be reduced by using built-in, self-checking features in the processor. 3.4 Calibration Calibration is an alternative means for reducing errors resulting from uncertainties in path length and angle, cross section, and path location. Velocity profile errors can be corrected with in situ calibration or by properly simulated laboratory calibrations. There is an uncertainty in the flow rate estimate that results from errors .involved in the procedure used to calibrate an ultrasonic flowmeter. To reduce calibration uncertainty, calibration should be conducted according to national (ANSI) or international (ISO) standards. MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 3.5 Equipment Degradation Performance errors may arise due to fouling or phys- ical degradation of the equipment. Equipment design should include reasonable tolerance to changes in com- ponent values and process conditions. The equipment should also indicate when degradation of flowmeter performance occurs. The probability of error can be reduced considerably by including suitable self-test or diagnostic circuits in the equipment. 4 APPLICATION GUIDELINES 4.1 Performance Parameters By evaluating the performance parameters listed below, a user should be better able to predict the per- formance of a given ultrasonic flowmeter in a specific application, as well as compare its performance to other ultrasonic flowmeters. These parameters are limited to those which can be substantiated by test or well- established computational methods. (It should be em- phasized that the following performance parameters are normally determined by the manufacturer under specific reference conditions that will, in general, differ from the user’s actual conditions.) Subjective or nonperformance parameters, such as convenience of installation, reliabil- ity, and cost, are left to the individual user for evalua- tion. In each case below, the range and conditions ap- plicable to each parameter should be specified. 4.1.1 Accuracy. Accuracy describes the uncertainty of a measured value as compared to its true value and is commonly reported as a percentage of actual flow, spap, or full scale. The preferred method is to specify the max- imum deviation (in percent) between measured flow and actual flow (see also ANSI/ASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes). 4.1.2 Linearity. The data obtained by test of any in- strument consists of points scattered around a smooth curve that represents the nominal characteristic of the instrument. Linearity is the maximum deviation, at any flow rate, of that smooth curve from a least squares lin- ear fit to the data and should be reported as a percentage of that flow rate. 4.1.3 Repeatability. Repeatability is the ability of a flowmeter to return to a previously indicated flow rate after a deviation in either direction from and return to the flow conditions which caused that indicated flow rate. It also includes readout variations under constant flow conditions. Repeatability should be reported as the maximum expected deviation between these indicated flow rates expressed as a percentage of the flow rate 8 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	14	14
4.2	Installation Considerations	MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS indication (see also ANSI/ASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes). 4.1.4 Stability. Stability is a measure of change in ac- curacy with time. It should be reported as the maximum deviation in accuracy, as a percentage of actual flow, which can be expected to occur over a specified time period (subject to constant hydraulic conditions). 4.1.5 Resolution. Resolution is the minimum change in actual flow required to produce an observable change in the output of the equipment. 4.1.6 Rangeability. Rangeability is the maximum and minimum flow rates over which the performance is spec- ified (see also ANSI/ASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes). 4.1.7. Response Time. Response time is the time it takes, following a step change in the flow rate, for the flowmeter’s output to indicate a change in flow rate equal to 63% of the step change. 4.1.8 Power Requirements. The power requirements of the flowmeter, including voltage and frequency toler- ances necessary for proper performance, as well as the flowmeter’s power consumption, should be clearly specified. 4.2 Installation Considerations 4.2.1 Introduction. Many of the error sources listed in Section 3 can be reduced or eliminated by proper instal- lation. Errors the user should address during the design phase of a project are listed below. 4.2.2 Acoustic Path Length and Angle. Changes in acoustic path length and angle can be caused by signifi- cant temperature or pressure changes as well as external loading of the meter section. The installation location should be chosen to minimize these effects. 4.2.3 Signal Detection. Suspended solids, fouling, en- trained air, or cavitation (caused by upstream equipment or even the meter itself) may degrade accuracy or pre- vent operation by attenuating the acoustic signal. Elec- trical interference and acoustic noise caused by mechan- ical vibration or cavitation can also interfere with the meter’s operation. 4.2.4 Multiple Fluids. Metering fluids with widely dif- fering acoustic properties may require multiple primary devices (spool pieces) due to excessive acoustic beam an- gular variations in refractive systems and/or excessive signal loss due to acoustic mismatch or attenuation. Under these conditions the manufacturer should be consulted. ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 4.2.5 Secondary Flow. Secondary flow directly af- fects a meter’s performance and should be considered in the design of the installation and in the selection and orientation of a meter. In general, the meter should be placed as far as possible from upstream elbows, transi- tions, valves, etc. 4.2.6 Integration. Flow profile changes and dimen- sional changes in the measurement section, including those caused by corrosion, erosion, or material buildup, directly affect meter performance and should be con- sidered in the selection, location, and orientation of a meter. The measurement section should be inspected period- ically to determine if the cross section area factor K or profile correction factor S should be adjusted to com- pensate for observed changes. 4.2.7 Calibration. Installation considerations and the required installed accuracy usually determine the method of calibration. 5 METER FACTOR DETERMINATION AND VERIFICATION There are three principal methods of meter factor (a) laboratory calibration (b) field calibration (c) analytical procedures determination: The first two can be used to verify meter performance. 5.1 Laboratory Calibration Laboratory calibrations should be conducted at fa- cilities where the procedures are in accordance with national or international standards. The calibration tests should generally be run using water that is free from acoustically interfering entrained air or solid particles. Standard calibrations should be conducted using flows that are as free as possible from swirl, nonaxisymmetric flow, and pulsation. Generally, these conditions have been achieved by using sufficient lengths of straight pipe upstream and downstream of the measurement section and, if necessary, by installing up- stream flow conditioners. The extent to which the above conditions have been achieved can be determined by noting the sensitivity of the meter factor to rotation and translation of the pri- mary device. A statistically significant number of runs should be made over a range of flow rates. Flowmeter accuracy, 9 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD within the uncertainty of the laboratory standards, should be determined by the combined random and sys- tematic errors in the measurement of the volumetric flow rate. Special calibration tests may also be performed for those cases where the piping in the final installation may produce nonaxisymmetric flow or where other flow ir- regularities are suspected. This will require appropriate modeling of upstream and downstream piping. 5.2 Field Calibration Field calibration, as opposed to laboratory calibration, has 'the advantage that true operating conditions are encountered. The major disadvantage may be a greater MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS degree. of uncertainty in the accuracy of the standards that are employed. In some cases, these secondary stan- dards may be considerably less accurate than the ultra- sonic flowmeter being calibrated. 5.3 Analytical Procedures Analytical procedures are often the only available technique for meter factor determination. This is partic- ularly true for very high flow rates and large line sizes. These procedures require physical measurements as well as instructions and data supplied by the manufacturer. The uncertainty in the meter performance should reflect uncertainties associated with these procedures as well as those error sources outlined in Section 3. 10 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled APPENDIX A ACOUSTIC TRANSIT TIME IN A NONUNIFORM FLUID VELOCITY FIELD (This Appendix is not an integral part of ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 and is included for information purposes only.) In the case of a nonuniform axial flow field, it can be shown that the length 1 of the acoustic path, which in this case is not a straight line, is given to second order by: where 1, is the straight line distance connecting the centers of the faces of the acoustic trans- mitter and receiver (see Fig. 1) and where 8, is the angle of 1, with respect to the pipe axis, and vax and Vax2 are averages of the liquid axial velocity profile. To the degree that a << 1, the effective path of the acoustic ray can be taken to be a straight line equal to I,. This being the case, the apparent speed of sound at any given point, for an acoustic pulse traveling upstream along this straight line path, is given bY - while that for the downstream pulse is given by The transit times for upstream and downstream acoustic pulses (tup, tdown) are given respectively by: 11 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w and To the extent that (V, IC,)' << 1, these equations reduce to - and where Taking the difference of the reciprocal of these transit times leads to 2V, cos eo 1, [1- cosz eo ($J] - N To the extent that cos' Bo ( v,/Co)' << 1, this result reduces to ) - At cos eo tdown tup where At = tup - tdown. The above relationship is valid to the degree that the following three conditions are met: 12 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w Assuming the worst case, i.e., that velocity profile which results in the most stringent condi- tions, these inequalities reduce to: In most practical cases the middle condition is the limiting one. 13 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w APPENDIX B SELECTION GUIDELINES (This Appendix is not an integral part of ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 and is included for information purposes only.) This Appendix is intended to assist in selecting the most appropriate ultrasonic flowmeter for a particular application. Since there are many variations and differ- ences even among the same types of flowmeters, this Appendix addresses itself only to the major differences between the types. It is suggested that the application conditions be discussed with the manufacturers prior to a decision on a particular type of flowmeter. B1 SINGLE PATH VERSUS MULTIPATH INSTRUMENTS Single path instruments are usually lower in cost than multipath instruments. They are also less complex, and therefore usually somewhat simpler to install. Multipath flowmeters can exhibit better performance than single path meters under the variable and/or nonideal velocity profile distribution conditions caused by changing Reyn- olds number, changes in friction factor, and the effects caused by upstream and downstream elbows, valves, or other sources of flow disturbance. The choice of path orientations varies among manufacturers. It can be either crossed or parallel, either chordal or diametric. Choice of the most appropriate path distribution should be made after a full discussion of the application conditions with the various manufacturers. B2 EXTERNALLY MOUNTED VERSUS INSERT-TYPE TRANSDUCERS Externally mounted transducers are the simplest to install on existing pipe and, since they do not require any extensive pipe preparation, are less expensive to install than insert systems. Since the pipe inner wall is undisturbed, there is no flow disturbance in the vicinity of the transducers. They can also be easily removed with- out requiring shutdown of the process. Since these sys- tems utilize a beam that refracts into the liquid, they may be affected by variations in the sonic properties of the liquid and the pipe. The manufacturer should be contacted to ensure that the expected application con- ditions can be handled with satisfactory performance. Insert type systems can be of two types - those using wetted transducers and those where the transducers are installed in a protective well. Where the transducer faces and protective surfaces are orthogonal to the acoustic path, these systems can offer greater immunity to changes in the sonic velocity of the liquid since refrac- tion of the beam does not take place. Since these sys- tems usually either have the transducer recessed in a cavity or protruding into the liquid beyond the pipe wall, a local flow disturbance results which may affect the meters performance. Although reportedly rare, the transducer cavity could collect debris. Those insert systems where this well is filed with a protective window result in refraction of the beam through the liquid and require either relatively constant sonic velocity or compensation in the secondary device. NOTE: If very large changes in sonic velocity occur, refaaction may cause the sonic beam to miss the opposing transduces. Insert type systems may provide greater acoustic power since they avoid the transmission loss through the pipe wall. They may also, in some cases, offer a greater signal-to-noise ratio since they avoid some of the pipe borne, self-generated noise which may affect externally installed systems. 14 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	15	15
5	Meter Factor Determination and Verification	CONTENTS ... Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111 Committee Roster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v 1 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2 Flowmeter Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 3 Error Sources and Their Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 4 Application Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 5 Meter Factor Determination and Verification .......................... 9 Figures 1 Wetted Transducer Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2 Protected Configuration With Cavities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 3 Protected Configuration With Protrusions ............................. 4 4 Protected Configuration With Smooth Bore ............................ 4 5 Acoustic Path Configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 6 A Typical Cross Path Ultrasonic Flowmeter Configuration (Paths May Be Multipath Diametric or Chordal) ............................ 7 Appendices A Acoustic Transit Time in a Nonuniform Fluid Velocity Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 B Selection Guidelines ........................................... 14 vii Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 1 GENERAL 1.1 Scope This Standard applies only to ultrasonic flowmeters that base their operation on the measurement of transit times of acoustic signals. Further, this Standard concerns only the application of such meters when used to mea- sure the volumetric flow rate of a liquid exhibiting homogeneous acoustic properties and flowing in a com- pletely fdled closed conduit. Not covered by this Standard are ultrasonic flow- meters that derive volumetric flow rate from measure- ments of the deviation, scattering (Doppler flowmeter), or correlation of acoustic signals. 1.2 Purpose This Standard provides: (a) a description of the operating principles employed (b) a description of error sources and performance (c) a common set of terminology, symbols, defini- by the ultrasonic flowmeters covered in this Standard; verification procedures; tions, and specifications. 1.3 Terminology, Symbols, and Definitions Terminology and symbols used in this Standard, except for those defined below, are in accordance with ANWASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes. acoustic path - the path that the acoustic signals follow as they propagate through the measurement section be- tween the transducer elements axid flow velocity (Vax) - the component of liquid flow velocity at a point in the measurement section that is parallel to the measurement section’s axis and in the direction of the flow being measured cross flow velocity - the component of liquid flow ve- locity at a point in the measurement section that is per- pendicular to the measurement section’s axis measurement section - the section of conduit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals. The measurement section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section and lo- cated at the extreme upstream and downstream trans- ducer positions. nonrefractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid inter- faces at a right angle refractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid interfaces at other than a right angle transducer - the combination of the transducer element and passive materials transducer element - an active component that pro- duces either acoustic output in response to an electric stimulus and/or an electric output in response to an acoustic stimulus transit time (t) - the time required for an acoustic signal to traverse an acoustic path velocity profire correction factor (S) - a dimensionless factor based on measured knowledge of the velocity pro- file used to adjust the meter output 2 FLOWMETER DESCRIPTION The transit-time ultrasonic flowmeter being con- sidered in this Standard is a complete system composed of the primary device, which is a measurement section with one or more pairs of transducers, and the secondary device, which is the electronic equipment necessary to operate the transducers, make the measurements, pro- cess the measured data, and display or record results. 1 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 2.1 Operating Principles 2.1.1 Introduction. At any given instant, the differ- ence between the apparent speed of sound in a moving liquid and the speed of sound in that same liquid at rest is directly proportional to the liquid’s instantaneous velocity. As a consequence, a measure of the average velocity of the liquid along a path can be obtained by transmitting an acoustic pulse along the path and sub- sequently measuring its transit time. The volumetric flow rate of a liquid flowing in a com- pletely filled closed conduit is defined as the average velocity of the liquid over a cross section multiplied by the area of the cross section. Thus, by measuring the average velocity of a liquid along one or more acoustic paths and combining the measurements with knowledge of the cross-sectional area and the velocity profile over the cross section, it is possible to obtain an estimate of the volumetric flow rate of the liquid in the conduit. The theoretical considerations involved in implement- ing these concepts is the subject of this section. 2.1.2 Fluid Velocity Measurement. Several techniques can be used to obtain a measure of the average effective speed of propagation of an acoustic pulse in a moving liquid in-order to determine the average axial flow ve- locity (V,) along an acoustic path. Two approaches, transit-time difference and frequency difference, will be discussed here. 2.1.2.1 Transit-Time Difference. The basis of this technique is the direct measurement of the transit time of acoustic signals as they propagate between a trans- mitter and a receiver, both of which are assumed (see para. 2.1.3) to be in direct contact with the liquid. Dif- ferent transmitter/receiver arrangements are described in para. 2.1.3 below. For an acoustic signal traveling up- stream, the apparent sound speed at any point along the line of transmission, assuming only axial flow, is where C, is the speed of sound in the liquid at rest, 6 is the angle between the acoustic path and V,, and V, is the axial flow velocity at the point in question (see Fig. 1). For a downstream pulse, In the ideal case of plug flow, V,, is constant through- out the liquid and the acoustic path is a straight line, i.e., 0 = constant = 8, (path angle for fluid at rest). MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Consequently, Cup and CdO- are both constants along the acoustic path. In this case the upstream and down- stream transit times(tup, tdo-) are given respectively by: tup = (3) c, ++ - v, cos eo and (4) sin’ e, + V , cos e, where 1, is the straight line distance between the centers of the faces of the acoustic transmitter and receiver. Taking the difference between the reciprocals of these transit times leads to 1 1 2va, cos e, - tdown tup IO and, on rearranging, to where At = tup - tdown. Since v,, is constant, v, = v,, (the average flow velocity). This analysis becomes more complicated in the ab- sence of plug flow. Nevertheless, to the degree that (Vax/Co)&ax. << 1, the result for the average of the axial liquid velocity along the acoustic path (v,) is identical (see Appendix A), i.e., - 2.1.2.2 Frequency Difference. In a frequency differ- ence measurement approach, the reception of an acous- tic signal at the receiver is used as a reference for gener- ating a subsequent acoustic signal at the transmitter. Assuming no delays other than the propagation time of the acoustic pulses in the liquid, the frequency at which the pulses are generated or received is proportional to the reciprocal of their transit time. The equations derived in the previous paragraph are equally valid in this case, the 2 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD transit time being replaced by the reciprocal of a con- 2.1.4 Estimating Volumetric Flow. Once the average stant (Kf) times the frequencies, i.e., axial flow velocity along an acoustic path has been found, the volumetric flow rate can be calculated from - Kf 10 the following equation: v, = (fdown - fup) (6) 2 cos eo n 2.1.3 Transducer Considerations. In the preceding paragraph it was assumed that the transducer element was in direct contact with the liquid and that the acous- tic signal was propagated normal to the transducer/liquid interface. In most’ cases it is desirable to protect the transducer element from the process liquid by using in- tervening materials (see Figs. 2 and 3). If such an ar- rangement is employed, Eq. (5) takes the following form: where to, a function of temperature, is the transit time of the acoustic signals in the intervening materials. The equation appropriate to the frequency difference technique must also be modified: where fo is equal to 1 /to. Use of an intervening material also allows the possibil- ity of acoustic signals entering and leaving the liquid along a path that is not normal to the solid/liquid inter- face. For example, the intervening material could be flush with the inside surface of the conduit as in Fig. 4. This further complicates the acoustic analysis.since not only the corrections mentioned above, but also correc- tions for the refraction of the acoustic signals at the solid/liquid interface must be introduced. This refraction takes place according to Snell’s Law, i.e., where C is the sound speed in the liquid and Cp is the sound speed in the intervening material. As a conse- quence, 0 and to (f,) in Eqs. (7) and (8) now become functions of the sound speeds (C, Cp), and hence, in gen- eral, of the temperature, pressure, and composition of the process fluid and intervening materials. where: A = the average cross-sectional area of the measure- ment section (L*) Q = the volumetric flow rate in the measurement section (L3/t) S = a velocity profile correction factor (dimension- less) v,i = the average axial flow velocity along acoustic path i(L/t) Wi = a weighting factor for acoustic path i that is de- pendent on measurement section geometry and acoustic path location (dimensionless) Note that increasing n can reduce the sensitivity of S to flow profiie variations. n = the number of acoustic paths 2.2 Implementation 2.2.1 Primary Device. The primary device consists of a separate spool piece with transducers installed, or an existing section of conduit to which transducers are in- stalled in the field. 2.2.1.1 Measurement Section. The section of con- duit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals is called the measurement section. This section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section located at the extreme up- stream and downstream transducer positions. The mea- surement section is usually circular in cross section; how- ever, it may be square, rectangular, elliptical, or some other shape. 2.2.1.2 Transducers. The transducers transmit and receive acoustic energy. They may be factory rtlounted or field mounted by clamping, threading, or bonding. Transducers may be wetted by the liquid or be non- wetted. Wetted transducers may be flush mounted, re- cessed, or protrude into the flow stream. Some non- wetted transducers may be removed while the line is in service. 2.2.1.3 Acoustic Paths. There may be one (single path) or more (multipath) acoustic paths in the measure- ment section, each having a pair of transducers. Common 3 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Upstream transducer element Downstream transducer element I I MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Intervening material \ \ \ I Measurement I section FIG. 3 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH PROTRUSIONS FIG. 1 WETTED TRANSDUCER CONFIGURATION Intervening material '\ \ Intervening material L?\ FIG. 2 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH FIG. 4 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH CAVITIES SMOOTH BORE 4 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIl-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Single Path Axial Multipath ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Diametric Chordal Chordal Diametric .FIG. 5 ACOUSTIC PATH CONFIGURATIONS types are axial, diametric, and chordal, as shown in Fig. 5. 2.2.2 Secondary Device. The secondary device com- prises the electronic equipment required to operate the transducers, make the measurements, process the mea- sured data, and display or record the results. 2.2.2.1 Operation of Transducers. Transducers may be excited simultaneously or alternately with one or more transmissions in each direction. The acoustic fre- quency and pulse repetition rate may vary. The intercon- necting cable lengths between the secondary and pri- mary devices are an important consideration, and their maximum length is usually defined by the manufacturer. 2.2.2.2 Measurement Method. The transit time of an acoustic pulse is usually taken to be the time interval between initial excitation of the transmitter and some characteristic point of the received signal. Exact details vary from one manufacturer to another. 2.2.2.3 Processing of Data. The processing section, in addition to estimating the flow rate from measured transit times, should be capable of rejecting invalid measurements, noise, etc. The indicated flow rate may be the result of one or more individual flow velocity determinations. 2.2.2.4 Displays and Outputs. Most meters have several outputs available, either as standard features or as optional additions to the equipment. Displays may show flow rate, integrated flow volume and/or direction, and may be analog or digital. Signal outputs usually in- clude one or more of the following: current, voltage, dig- ital, and a pulse rate proportional to flow. These outputs may or may not be electrically isolated. Flowmeters may also include alarms and diagnostic aids. 5 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 3 ERROR SOURCES AND THEIR REDUCTION The purpose of this Section is to describe possible er- ror sources for the ultrasonic flowmeters covered by this Standard. Although these errors may not be significant in some cases, they should all be addressed in detail when analyzing the error for a particular flowmeter. 3.1 Axial Velocity Estimate Axial velocity errors are those errors that are made in the determination of Fax across an acoustic path [see Eqs. (5)-(8)]. . 3.1.1 Acoustic Path Length and Angle. The determi- nation of axial flow velocity (Fa) is based on the acous- tic path length (1,) and angle (6). The error in v, is in direct proportion to the uncertainty in the acoustic path length and angle. Acoustic path length and angle errors may be static due to inaccuracies in the initial measure- ments, or they may be dynamic due to changes in the measurement section or, in the case of refractive sys- tems, changes in the index of refraction of the materials in the acoustic path. Errors in the acoustic path .length or angle for nonre- fractive systems can be reduced by accurate geometric and acoustic measurements. For flowmeters in which sound energy undergoes refraction, errors in acoustic path length or angle can be reduced by design and/or compensation based upon knowledge of the speed of sound in the process liquid and intervening materials be- tween the transducer element and the process liquid. In certain applications, compensation for changes in acoustic path length and angle which result from temper- ature or pressure induced pipe deformation may be pro- vided for in either refractive or nonrefractive systems. Systems where the transducers are field mounted can achieve accuracies comparable to systems where the transducers are factory mounted if precise postinstalla- tion measurements are made and the scaling of the elec- tronics is adjusted to reflect these as-built dimensions. 3.1.2 Transit Time 3.1.2.1 Timing. Uncertainty in the transit-time mea- surement due to limits in internal timing accuracy - and resolution lead to a corresponding uncertainty in V,. Errors in the measurement of transit time may be re- duced by the use of stable and accurate high frequency oscillators and averaging many individual transit-time measurements. Transit-time measurement errors are the most amenable of all potential errors to analysis. Transit-time measurement errors due to differences between upstream to downstream and downstream to upstream electronic signal paths may be reduced by MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS using the same detection electronics and transducer pairs for both directions of propagation. 3.1.2.2 Signal Detection. Acoustic transit-time mea- surements may be affected by inconsistencies in recogni- tion of the received acoustic signal caused by variations in received signal level of waveform and noise. (a) Variations in received signal level or waveform can occur as the acoustic properties of the liquid in the measurement section change because of excessive amounts of entrained air, suspended solids, temperature, pressure, etc., or as transducer fouling occurs. These vari- ations may result in uncertainty in determining the tran- sit time, thus causing uncertainty in V,. (b) Noise can affect the accuracy of the transit-time measurement. Noise sources may be either electrical or acoustic, and either external or self-generated. Generally, externally generated electronic or acoustic noise is ran- dom with respect to the received signal. Self-generated acoustic noise, however, is usually synchronized with the received signal and is therefore much harder to compen- sate for in the secondary device. Signal detection errors are reduced by operating with high signal-to-noise ratios. Methods can be provided that will reject those signals which are excessively attenuated or which are distorted by noise. If the background noise is caused by external sources, the signal-to-noise ratio can be improved by increasing the transmitted signal level. However, in many cases, the most troublesome noise is self-generated acoustic noise. This noise generally increases as the level of the trans- mitted signal is increased. The signal-to-noise ratio, in these cases, may be improved by acoustically isolating the transducers from the measurement section by ap- plication of damping materials and/or other suitable techniques. 3.1.3 Sound Speed Dependency. The speed of sound in the liquid and in any intervening materials along the acoustic path varies with composition, temperature, and pressure. Depending upon a particular ultrasonic flow- meter’s design, I,, 8 , and to (f,) [Eqs. (7) and (811 may be affected. In nearly all cases, the errors caused by sound speed variations in the liquid are negligible for a properly im- plemented, nonrefractive, wetted transducer system. Changes in the speed of sound in the intervening ma- terial may, however, require compensation for non- wetted transducer systems. In refractive systems, changes in the speed of sound in intervening materials and the process liquid affect the acoustic path length and angle. It is possible to compen- sate for these effects. In rare cases, changes in the speed 6 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD / / \ / \ FIG. 6 A TYPICAL CROSS PATH ULTRASONIC FLOWMETER CONFIGURATION (PATHS MAY BE MULTIPATH DIAMETRIC OR CHORDAL) of sound in the liquid may refract the beam so much that it misses the opposing transducer. Accurate knowl- edge of the speed of sound in a particular liquid can reduce this possibility. 3.1.4 Secondary Flow. Secondary flow can produce an error in the determination of v, since it is normally assumed in the calculations that all flow is in the axial direction. Secondary flow is a result of flow perturba- tions occurring upstream or downstream of the measure- ment section because of devices such as elbows, valves, and pumps. Secondary flow may result in an error in determining - the transit time which ultimately affects The most effective way to reduce secondary flow er- rors is to avoid installations where severe secondary flow exists. Reduction of secondary flow may require long, straight runs of pipe and/or the use of flow straighteners, depending upon the nature of the secondary flow source and the accuracy required. Secondary flow errors can also be reduced by the use of an appropriate acoustic path orientation or by computing line velocities on ap- propriate multiple acoustic paths, i.e., crossed paths as illustrated in Fig. 6 , and averaging. vu. 3.2 Integration Integration error is the error in the flow rate estimate which occurs in the computation of the flow rate from Fa,, A , S, and Wi as shown in Eq. (10). 3.2.1 Cross Section Dimensional Errors. Error in the assumed cross-sectional area of the measurement section causes an error in the flow rate estimate. This error may be due to initial measurement section shape irregularities, such as out-of-roundness; or it may be due to changes in the initial shape caused by temperature, pressure, or structural loading. It may also be due to the formation of deposits or growths, such as algae,'in the measurement section. Usually it is due to combinations of the items mentioned above. Cross section dimensional errors can be reduced by manufacturing or choosing a measurement section which has constant dimensions along its length, can be accu- rately measured, and has a stable surface so that cross section changes with time due to corrosion, material buildup, or loss of protective coatings will be small. Additionally, if temperatures or pressures are expected to be substantially different from reference conditions, it may be necessary to adjust the measured dimensions to compensate for dimensional changes that may occur under operating conditions. In circular pipes, cross section dimensional errors can be reduced by minimizing the effects of out-of-roundness through averaging of diameter measurements made at the upstream, middle, and downstream ends of the mea- surement section. The measurement section should be inspected period- ically to determine if the dimensional factor should be adjusted to compensate for observed changes. 3.22 Acoustic Path Location. T h e acoustic path lo- cation, particularly in multipath flowmeters, is an impor- tant contributor to overall flowmeter accuracy. The un- certainty in the position of the acoustic path can cause errors through improper assignment of a weighting fac- tor (Wi) and by causing unnecessary sensitivity of i, to the velocity profile through nonoptimum placement of transducers. Errors due to acoustic path location can be reduced by suitable manufacturing techniques in the case of a prefabricated measurement section or by accurately determining the acoustic path for systems where the transducers are field mounted. Path locations can be 7 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	6	6
5.1	Laboratory Calibration	ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD determined in a variety of ways, but probably the most accurate involves optical determination of both the acoustic path location and angle within the measurement section. 3.2.3 Velocity Profile. Ultrasonic flowmeters are af- fected by variations in flow profile because uncertainty in the velocity profile causes an error in that may not be compensated for by the velocity profile correc- tion factor S. This error may affect both the linearity and the value of the flow rate estimate. Velocity profile variations can be caused by changes in flow rate (both transient and steady state), wall roughness, temperature, viscosity, upstream or downstream hydraulic conditions, transducer projections, and transducer cavities. In the absence of upstream and downstream hydraulic effects, the Reynolds number and friction factor of the measure- ment section would be sufficient to determine the veloc- ity profile correction factor S. There usually is a difference between the actual ve- locity profile and that assumed in the flowmeter’s com- putations. Since most flowmeter computations assume a fully developed velocity profile, errors can be reduced by placing the measurement section as far as possible from bends, valves, tees, transitions, etc. These errors can also be reduced by using a more accurate model of the actual velocity profile, or in general, by increasing the number of acoustic paths. 3.3 Computation There is a degree of error associated with the compu- tations made by the electronic circuits because of the finite limits in processing accuracies. However, this error will normally be negligible. Computation errors due to electronics malfunction can be reduced by using built-in, self-checking features in the processor. 3.4 Calibration Calibration is an alternative means for reducing errors resulting from uncertainties in path length and angle, cross section, and path location. Velocity profile errors can be corrected with in situ calibration or by properly simulated laboratory calibrations. There is an uncertainty in the flow rate estimate that results from errors .involved in the procedure used to calibrate an ultrasonic flowmeter. To reduce calibration uncertainty, calibration should be conducted according to national (ANSI) or international (ISO) standards. MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 3.5 Equipment Degradation Performance errors may arise due to fouling or phys- ical degradation of the equipment. Equipment design should include reasonable tolerance to changes in com- ponent values and process conditions. The equipment should also indicate when degradation of flowmeter performance occurs. The probability of error can be reduced considerably by including suitable self-test or diagnostic circuits in the equipment. 4 APPLICATION GUIDELINES 4.1 Performance Parameters By evaluating the performance parameters listed below, a user should be better able to predict the per- formance of a given ultrasonic flowmeter in a specific application, as well as compare its performance to other ultrasonic flowmeters. These parameters are limited to those which can be substantiated by test or well- established computational methods. (It should be em- phasized that the following performance parameters are normally determined by the manufacturer under specific reference conditions that will, in general, differ from the user’s actual conditions.) Subjective or nonperformance parameters, such as convenience of installation, reliabil- ity, and cost, are left to the individual user for evalua- tion. In each case below, the range and conditions ap- plicable to each parameter should be specified. 4.1.1 Accuracy. Accuracy describes the uncertainty of a measured value as compared to its true value and is commonly reported as a percentage of actual flow, spap, or full scale. The preferred method is to specify the max- imum deviation (in percent) between measured flow and actual flow (see also ANSI/ASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes). 4.1.2 Linearity. The data obtained by test of any in- strument consists of points scattered around a smooth curve that represents the nominal characteristic of the instrument. Linearity is the maximum deviation, at any flow rate, of that smooth curve from a least squares lin- ear fit to the data and should be reported as a percentage of that flow rate. 4.1.3 Repeatability. Repeatability is the ability of a flowmeter to return to a previously indicated flow rate after a deviation in either direction from and return to the flow conditions which caused that indicated flow rate. It also includes readout variations under constant flow conditions. Repeatability should be reported as the maximum expected deviation between these indicated flow rates expressed as a percentage of the flow rate 8 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	14	14
5.2	Field Calibration	MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS indication (see also ANSI/ASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes). 4.1.4 Stability. Stability is a measure of change in ac- curacy with time. It should be reported as the maximum deviation in accuracy, as a percentage of actual flow, which can be expected to occur over a specified time period (subject to constant hydraulic conditions). 4.1.5 Resolution. Resolution is the minimum change in actual flow required to produce an observable change in the output of the equipment. 4.1.6 Rangeability. Rangeability is the maximum and minimum flow rates over which the performance is spec- ified (see also ANSI/ASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes). 4.1.7. Response Time. Response time is the time it takes, following a step change in the flow rate, for the flowmeter’s output to indicate a change in flow rate equal to 63% of the step change. 4.1.8 Power Requirements. The power requirements of the flowmeter, including voltage and frequency toler- ances necessary for proper performance, as well as the flowmeter’s power consumption, should be clearly specified. 4.2 Installation Considerations 4.2.1 Introduction. Many of the error sources listed in Section 3 can be reduced or eliminated by proper instal- lation. Errors the user should address during the design phase of a project are listed below. 4.2.2 Acoustic Path Length and Angle. Changes in acoustic path length and angle can be caused by signifi- cant temperature or pressure changes as well as external loading of the meter section. The installation location should be chosen to minimize these effects. 4.2.3 Signal Detection. Suspended solids, fouling, en- trained air, or cavitation (caused by upstream equipment or even the meter itself) may degrade accuracy or pre- vent operation by attenuating the acoustic signal. Elec- trical interference and acoustic noise caused by mechan- ical vibration or cavitation can also interfere with the meter’s operation. 4.2.4 Multiple Fluids. Metering fluids with widely dif- fering acoustic properties may require multiple primary devices (spool pieces) due to excessive acoustic beam an- gular variations in refractive systems and/or excessive signal loss due to acoustic mismatch or attenuation. Under these conditions the manufacturer should be consulted. ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 4.2.5 Secondary Flow. Secondary flow directly af- fects a meter’s performance and should be considered in the design of the installation and in the selection and orientation of a meter. In general, the meter should be placed as far as possible from upstream elbows, transi- tions, valves, etc. 4.2.6 Integration. Flow profile changes and dimen- sional changes in the measurement section, including those caused by corrosion, erosion, or material buildup, directly affect meter performance and should be con- sidered in the selection, location, and orientation of a meter. The measurement section should be inspected period- ically to determine if the cross section area factor K or profile correction factor S should be adjusted to com- pensate for observed changes. 4.2.7 Calibration. Installation considerations and the required installed accuracy usually determine the method of calibration. 5 METER FACTOR DETERMINATION AND VERIFICATION There are three principal methods of meter factor (a) laboratory calibration (b) field calibration (c) analytical procedures determination: The first two can be used to verify meter performance. 5.1 Laboratory Calibration Laboratory calibrations should be conducted at fa- cilities where the procedures are in accordance with national or international standards. The calibration tests should generally be run using water that is free from acoustically interfering entrained air or solid particles. Standard calibrations should be conducted using flows that are as free as possible from swirl, nonaxisymmetric flow, and pulsation. Generally, these conditions have been achieved by using sufficient lengths of straight pipe upstream and downstream of the measurement section and, if necessary, by installing up- stream flow conditioners. The extent to which the above conditions have been achieved can be determined by noting the sensitivity of the meter factor to rotation and translation of the pri- mary device. A statistically significant number of runs should be made over a range of flow rates. Flowmeter accuracy, 9 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD within the uncertainty of the laboratory standards, should be determined by the combined random and sys- tematic errors in the measurement of the volumetric flow rate. Special calibration tests may also be performed for those cases where the piping in the final installation may produce nonaxisymmetric flow or where other flow ir- regularities are suspected. This will require appropriate modeling of upstream and downstream piping. 5.2 Field Calibration Field calibration, as opposed to laboratory calibration, has 'the advantage that true operating conditions are encountered. The major disadvantage may be a greater MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS degree. of uncertainty in the accuracy of the standards that are employed. In some cases, these secondary stan- dards may be considerably less accurate than the ultra- sonic flowmeter being calibrated. 5.3 Analytical Procedures Analytical procedures are often the only available technique for meter factor determination. This is partic- ularly true for very high flow rates and large line sizes. These procedures require physical measurements as well as instructions and data supplied by the manufacturer. The uncertainty in the meter performance should reflect uncertainties associated with these procedures as well as those error sources outlined in Section 3. 10 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled APPENDIX A ACOUSTIC TRANSIT TIME IN A NONUNIFORM FLUID VELOCITY FIELD (This Appendix is not an integral part of ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 and is included for information purposes only.) In the case of a nonuniform axial flow field, it can be shown that the length 1 of the acoustic path, which in this case is not a straight line, is given to second order by: where 1, is the straight line distance connecting the centers of the faces of the acoustic trans- mitter and receiver (see Fig. 1) and where 8, is the angle of 1, with respect to the pipe axis, and vax and Vax2 are averages of the liquid axial velocity profile. To the degree that a << 1, the effective path of the acoustic ray can be taken to be a straight line equal to I,. This being the case, the apparent speed of sound at any given point, for an acoustic pulse traveling upstream along this straight line path, is given bY - while that for the downstream pulse is given by The transit times for upstream and downstream acoustic pulses (tup, tdown) are given respectively by: 11 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w and To the extent that (V, IC,)' << 1, these equations reduce to - and where Taking the difference of the reciprocal of these transit times leads to 2V, cos eo 1, [1- cosz eo ($J] - N To the extent that cos' Bo ( v,/Co)' << 1, this result reduces to ) - At cos eo tdown tup where At = tup - tdown. The above relationship is valid to the degree that the following three conditions are met: 12 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w Assuming the worst case, i.e., that velocity profile which results in the most stringent condi- tions, these inequalities reduce to: In most practical cases the middle condition is the limiting one. 13 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w APPENDIX B SELECTION GUIDELINES (This Appendix is not an integral part of ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 and is included for information purposes only.) This Appendix is intended to assist in selecting the most appropriate ultrasonic flowmeter for a particular application. Since there are many variations and differ- ences even among the same types of flowmeters, this Appendix addresses itself only to the major differences between the types. It is suggested that the application conditions be discussed with the manufacturers prior to a decision on a particular type of flowmeter. B1 SINGLE PATH VERSUS MULTIPATH INSTRUMENTS Single path instruments are usually lower in cost than multipath instruments. They are also less complex, and therefore usually somewhat simpler to install. Multipath flowmeters can exhibit better performance than single path meters under the variable and/or nonideal velocity profile distribution conditions caused by changing Reyn- olds number, changes in friction factor, and the effects caused by upstream and downstream elbows, valves, or other sources of flow disturbance. The choice of path orientations varies among manufacturers. It can be either crossed or parallel, either chordal or diametric. Choice of the most appropriate path distribution should be made after a full discussion of the application conditions with the various manufacturers. B2 EXTERNALLY MOUNTED VERSUS INSERT-TYPE TRANSDUCERS Externally mounted transducers are the simplest to install on existing pipe and, since they do not require any extensive pipe preparation, are less expensive to install than insert systems. Since the pipe inner wall is undisturbed, there is no flow disturbance in the vicinity of the transducers. They can also be easily removed with- out requiring shutdown of the process. Since these sys- tems utilize a beam that refracts into the liquid, they may be affected by variations in the sonic properties of the liquid and the pipe. The manufacturer should be contacted to ensure that the expected application con- ditions can be handled with satisfactory performance. Insert type systems can be of two types - those using wetted transducers and those where the transducers are installed in a protective well. Where the transducer faces and protective surfaces are orthogonal to the acoustic path, these systems can offer greater immunity to changes in the sonic velocity of the liquid since refrac- tion of the beam does not take place. Since these sys- tems usually either have the transducer recessed in a cavity or protruding into the liquid beyond the pipe wall, a local flow disturbance results which may affect the meters performance. Although reportedly rare, the transducer cavity could collect debris. Those insert systems where this well is filed with a protective window result in refraction of the beam through the liquid and require either relatively constant sonic velocity or compensation in the secondary device. NOTE: If very large changes in sonic velocity occur, refaaction may cause the sonic beam to miss the opposing transduces. Insert type systems may provide greater acoustic power since they avoid the transmission loss through the pipe wall. They may also, in some cases, offer a greater signal-to-noise ratio since they avoid some of the pipe borne, self-generated noise which may affect externally installed systems. 14 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	15	15
5.3	Analytical Procedures	MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS indication (see also ANSI/ASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes). 4.1.4 Stability. Stability is a measure of change in ac- curacy with time. It should be reported as the maximum deviation in accuracy, as a percentage of actual flow, which can be expected to occur over a specified time period (subject to constant hydraulic conditions). 4.1.5 Resolution. Resolution is the minimum change in actual flow required to produce an observable change in the output of the equipment. 4.1.6 Rangeability. Rangeability is the maximum and minimum flow rates over which the performance is spec- ified (see also ANSI/ASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes). 4.1.7. Response Time. Response time is the time it takes, following a step change in the flow rate, for the flowmeter’s output to indicate a change in flow rate equal to 63% of the step change. 4.1.8 Power Requirements. The power requirements of the flowmeter, including voltage and frequency toler- ances necessary for proper performance, as well as the flowmeter’s power consumption, should be clearly specified. 4.2 Installation Considerations 4.2.1 Introduction. Many of the error sources listed in Section 3 can be reduced or eliminated by proper instal- lation. Errors the user should address during the design phase of a project are listed below. 4.2.2 Acoustic Path Length and Angle. Changes in acoustic path length and angle can be caused by signifi- cant temperature or pressure changes as well as external loading of the meter section. The installation location should be chosen to minimize these effects. 4.2.3 Signal Detection. Suspended solids, fouling, en- trained air, or cavitation (caused by upstream equipment or even the meter itself) may degrade accuracy or pre- vent operation by attenuating the acoustic signal. Elec- trical interference and acoustic noise caused by mechan- ical vibration or cavitation can also interfere with the meter’s operation. 4.2.4 Multiple Fluids. Metering fluids with widely dif- fering acoustic properties may require multiple primary devices (spool pieces) due to excessive acoustic beam an- gular variations in refractive systems and/or excessive signal loss due to acoustic mismatch or attenuation. Under these conditions the manufacturer should be consulted. ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 4.2.5 Secondary Flow. Secondary flow directly af- fects a meter’s performance and should be considered in the design of the installation and in the selection and orientation of a meter. In general, the meter should be placed as far as possible from upstream elbows, transi- tions, valves, etc. 4.2.6 Integration. Flow profile changes and dimen- sional changes in the measurement section, including those caused by corrosion, erosion, or material buildup, directly affect meter performance and should be con- sidered in the selection, location, and orientation of a meter. The measurement section should be inspected period- ically to determine if the cross section area factor K or profile correction factor S should be adjusted to com- pensate for observed changes. 4.2.7 Calibration. Installation considerations and the required installed accuracy usually determine the method of calibration. 5 METER FACTOR DETERMINATION AND VERIFICATION There are three principal methods of meter factor (a) laboratory calibration (b) field calibration (c) analytical procedures determination: The first two can be used to verify meter performance. 5.1 Laboratory Calibration Laboratory calibrations should be conducted at fa- cilities where the procedures are in accordance with national or international standards. The calibration tests should generally be run using water that is free from acoustically interfering entrained air or solid particles. Standard calibrations should be conducted using flows that are as free as possible from swirl, nonaxisymmetric flow, and pulsation. Generally, these conditions have been achieved by using sufficient lengths of straight pipe upstream and downstream of the measurement section and, if necessary, by installing up- stream flow conditioners. The extent to which the above conditions have been achieved can be determined by noting the sensitivity of the meter factor to rotation and translation of the pri- mary device. A statistically significant number of runs should be made over a range of flow rates. Flowmeter accuracy, 9 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD within the uncertainty of the laboratory standards, should be determined by the combined random and sys- tematic errors in the measurement of the volumetric flow rate. Special calibration tests may also be performed for those cases where the piping in the final installation may produce nonaxisymmetric flow or where other flow ir- regularities are suspected. This will require appropriate modeling of upstream and downstream piping. 5.2 Field Calibration Field calibration, as opposed to laboratory calibration, has 'the advantage that true operating conditions are encountered. The major disadvantage may be a greater MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS degree. of uncertainty in the accuracy of the standards that are employed. In some cases, these secondary stan- dards may be considerably less accurate than the ultra- sonic flowmeter being calibrated. 5.3 Analytical Procedures Analytical procedures are often the only available technique for meter factor determination. This is partic- ularly true for very high flow rates and large line sizes. These procedures require physical measurements as well as instructions and data supplied by the manufacturer. The uncertainty in the meter performance should reflect uncertainties associated with these procedures as well as those error sources outlined in Section 3. 10 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled APPENDIX A ACOUSTIC TRANSIT TIME IN A NONUNIFORM FLUID VELOCITY FIELD (This Appendix is not an integral part of ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 and is included for information purposes only.) In the case of a nonuniform axial flow field, it can be shown that the length 1 of the acoustic path, which in this case is not a straight line, is given to second order by: where 1, is the straight line distance connecting the centers of the faces of the acoustic trans- mitter and receiver (see Fig. 1) and where 8, is the angle of 1, with respect to the pipe axis, and vax and Vax2 are averages of the liquid axial velocity profile. To the degree that a << 1, the effective path of the acoustic ray can be taken to be a straight line equal to I,. This being the case, the apparent speed of sound at any given point, for an acoustic pulse traveling upstream along this straight line path, is given bY - while that for the downstream pulse is given by The transit times for upstream and downstream acoustic pulses (tup, tdown) are given respectively by: 11 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w and To the extent that (V, IC,)' << 1, these equations reduce to - and where Taking the difference of the reciprocal of these transit times leads to 2V, cos eo 1, [1- cosz eo ($J] - N To the extent that cos' Bo ( v,/Co)' << 1, this result reduces to ) - At cos eo tdown tup where At = tup - tdown. The above relationship is valid to the degree that the following three conditions are met: 12 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w Assuming the worst case, i.e., that velocity profile which results in the most stringent condi- tions, these inequalities reduce to: In most practical cases the middle condition is the limiting one. 13 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w APPENDIX B SELECTION GUIDELINES (This Appendix is not an integral part of ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 and is included for information purposes only.) This Appendix is intended to assist in selecting the most appropriate ultrasonic flowmeter for a particular application. Since there are many variations and differ- ences even among the same types of flowmeters, this Appendix addresses itself only to the major differences between the types. It is suggested that the application conditions be discussed with the manufacturers prior to a decision on a particular type of flowmeter. B1 SINGLE PATH VERSUS MULTIPATH INSTRUMENTS Single path instruments are usually lower in cost than multipath instruments. They are also less complex, and therefore usually somewhat simpler to install. Multipath flowmeters can exhibit better performance than single path meters under the variable and/or nonideal velocity profile distribution conditions caused by changing Reyn- olds number, changes in friction factor, and the effects caused by upstream and downstream elbows, valves, or other sources of flow disturbance. The choice of path orientations varies among manufacturers. It can be either crossed or parallel, either chordal or diametric. Choice of the most appropriate path distribution should be made after a full discussion of the application conditions with the various manufacturers. B2 EXTERNALLY MOUNTED VERSUS INSERT-TYPE TRANSDUCERS Externally mounted transducers are the simplest to install on existing pipe and, since they do not require any extensive pipe preparation, are less expensive to install than insert systems. Since the pipe inner wall is undisturbed, there is no flow disturbance in the vicinity of the transducers. They can also be easily removed with- out requiring shutdown of the process. Since these sys- tems utilize a beam that refracts into the liquid, they may be affected by variations in the sonic properties of the liquid and the pipe. The manufacturer should be contacted to ensure that the expected application con- ditions can be handled with satisfactory performance. Insert type systems can be of two types - those using wetted transducers and those where the transducers are installed in a protective well. Where the transducer faces and protective surfaces are orthogonal to the acoustic path, these systems can offer greater immunity to changes in the sonic velocity of the liquid since refrac- tion of the beam does not take place. Since these sys- tems usually either have the transducer recessed in a cavity or protruding into the liquid beyond the pipe wall, a local flow disturbance results which may affect the meters performance. Although reportedly rare, the transducer cavity could collect debris. Those insert systems where this well is filed with a protective window result in refraction of the beam through the liquid and require either relatively constant sonic velocity or compensation in the secondary device. NOTE: If very large changes in sonic velocity occur, refaaction may cause the sonic beam to miss the opposing transduces. Insert type systems may provide greater acoustic power since they avoid the transmission loss through the pipe wall. They may also, in some cases, offer a greater signal-to-noise ratio since they avoid some of the pipe borne, self-generated noise which may affect externally installed systems. 14 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	15	15
6	Figures	CONTENTS ... Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111 Committee Roster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v 1 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2 Flowmeter Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 3 Error Sources and Their Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 4 Application Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 5 Meter Factor Determination and Verification .......................... 9 Figures 1 Wetted Transducer Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2 Protected Configuration With Cavities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 3 Protected Configuration With Protrusions ............................. 4 4 Protected Configuration With Smooth Bore ............................ 4 5 Acoustic Path Configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 6 A Typical Cross Path Ultrasonic Flowmeter Configuration (Paths May Be Multipath Diametric or Chordal) ............................ 7 Appendices A Acoustic Transit Time in a Nonuniform Fluid Velocity Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 B Selection Guidelines ........................................... 14 vii Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 1 GENERAL 1.1 Scope This Standard applies only to ultrasonic flowmeters that base their operation on the measurement of transit times of acoustic signals. Further, this Standard concerns only the application of such meters when used to mea- sure the volumetric flow rate of a liquid exhibiting homogeneous acoustic properties and flowing in a com- pletely fdled closed conduit. Not covered by this Standard are ultrasonic flow- meters that derive volumetric flow rate from measure- ments of the deviation, scattering (Doppler flowmeter), or correlation of acoustic signals. 1.2 Purpose This Standard provides: (a) a description of the operating principles employed (b) a description of error sources and performance (c) a common set of terminology, symbols, defini- by the ultrasonic flowmeters covered in this Standard; verification procedures; tions, and specifications. 1.3 Terminology, Symbols, and Definitions Terminology and symbols used in this Standard, except for those defined below, are in accordance with ANWASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes. acoustic path - the path that the acoustic signals follow as they propagate through the measurement section be- tween the transducer elements axid flow velocity (Vax) - the component of liquid flow velocity at a point in the measurement section that is parallel to the measurement section’s axis and in the direction of the flow being measured cross flow velocity - the component of liquid flow ve- locity at a point in the measurement section that is per- pendicular to the measurement section’s axis measurement section - the section of conduit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals. The measurement section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section and lo- cated at the extreme upstream and downstream trans- ducer positions. nonrefractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid inter- faces at a right angle refractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid interfaces at other than a right angle transducer - the combination of the transducer element and passive materials transducer element - an active component that pro- duces either acoustic output in response to an electric stimulus and/or an electric output in response to an acoustic stimulus transit time (t) - the time required for an acoustic signal to traverse an acoustic path velocity profire correction factor (S) - a dimensionless factor based on measured knowledge of the velocity pro- file used to adjust the meter output 2 FLOWMETER DESCRIPTION The transit-time ultrasonic flowmeter being con- sidered in this Standard is a complete system composed of the primary device, which is a measurement section with one or more pairs of transducers, and the secondary device, which is the electronic equipment necessary to operate the transducers, make the measurements, pro- cess the measured data, and display or record results. 1 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 2.1 Operating Principles 2.1.1 Introduction. At any given instant, the differ- ence between the apparent speed of sound in a moving liquid and the speed of sound in that same liquid at rest is directly proportional to the liquid’s instantaneous velocity. As a consequence, a measure of the average velocity of the liquid along a path can be obtained by transmitting an acoustic pulse along the path and sub- sequently measuring its transit time. The volumetric flow rate of a liquid flowing in a com- pletely filled closed conduit is defined as the average velocity of the liquid over a cross section multiplied by the area of the cross section. Thus, by measuring the average velocity of a liquid along one or more acoustic paths and combining the measurements with knowledge of the cross-sectional area and the velocity profile over the cross section, it is possible to obtain an estimate of the volumetric flow rate of the liquid in the conduit. The theoretical considerations involved in implement- ing these concepts is the subject of this section. 2.1.2 Fluid Velocity Measurement. Several techniques can be used to obtain a measure of the average effective speed of propagation of an acoustic pulse in a moving liquid in-order to determine the average axial flow ve- locity (V,) along an acoustic path. Two approaches, transit-time difference and frequency difference, will be discussed here. 2.1.2.1 Transit-Time Difference. The basis of this technique is the direct measurement of the transit time of acoustic signals as they propagate between a trans- mitter and a receiver, both of which are assumed (see para. 2.1.3) to be in direct contact with the liquid. Dif- ferent transmitter/receiver arrangements are described in para. 2.1.3 below. For an acoustic signal traveling up- stream, the apparent sound speed at any point along the line of transmission, assuming only axial flow, is where C, is the speed of sound in the liquid at rest, 6 is the angle between the acoustic path and V,, and V, is the axial flow velocity at the point in question (see Fig. 1). For a downstream pulse, In the ideal case of plug flow, V,, is constant through- out the liquid and the acoustic path is a straight line, i.e., 0 = constant = 8, (path angle for fluid at rest). MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Consequently, Cup and CdO- are both constants along the acoustic path. In this case the upstream and down- stream transit times(tup, tdo-) are given respectively by: tup = (3) c, ++ - v, cos eo and (4) sin’ e, + V , cos e, where 1, is the straight line distance between the centers of the faces of the acoustic transmitter and receiver. Taking the difference between the reciprocals of these transit times leads to 1 1 2va, cos e, - tdown tup IO and, on rearranging, to where At = tup - tdown. Since v,, is constant, v, = v,, (the average flow velocity). This analysis becomes more complicated in the ab- sence of plug flow. Nevertheless, to the degree that (Vax/Co)&ax. << 1, the result for the average of the axial liquid velocity along the acoustic path (v,) is identical (see Appendix A), i.e., - 2.1.2.2 Frequency Difference. In a frequency differ- ence measurement approach, the reception of an acous- tic signal at the receiver is used as a reference for gener- ating a subsequent acoustic signal at the transmitter. Assuming no delays other than the propagation time of the acoustic pulses in the liquid, the frequency at which the pulses are generated or received is proportional to the reciprocal of their transit time. The equations derived in the previous paragraph are equally valid in this case, the 2 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD transit time being replaced by the reciprocal of a con- 2.1.4 Estimating Volumetric Flow. Once the average stant (Kf) times the frequencies, i.e., axial flow velocity along an acoustic path has been found, the volumetric flow rate can be calculated from - Kf 10 the following equation: v, = (fdown - fup) (6) 2 cos eo n 2.1.3 Transducer Considerations. In the preceding paragraph it was assumed that the transducer element was in direct contact with the liquid and that the acous- tic signal was propagated normal to the transducer/liquid interface. In most’ cases it is desirable to protect the transducer element from the process liquid by using in- tervening materials (see Figs. 2 and 3). If such an ar- rangement is employed, Eq. (5) takes the following form: where to, a function of temperature, is the transit time of the acoustic signals in the intervening materials. The equation appropriate to the frequency difference technique must also be modified: where fo is equal to 1 /to. Use of an intervening material also allows the possibil- ity of acoustic signals entering and leaving the liquid along a path that is not normal to the solid/liquid inter- face. For example, the intervening material could be flush with the inside surface of the conduit as in Fig. 4. This further complicates the acoustic analysis.since not only the corrections mentioned above, but also correc- tions for the refraction of the acoustic signals at the solid/liquid interface must be introduced. This refraction takes place according to Snell’s Law, i.e., where C is the sound speed in the liquid and Cp is the sound speed in the intervening material. As a conse- quence, 0 and to (f,) in Eqs. (7) and (8) now become functions of the sound speeds (C, Cp), and hence, in gen- eral, of the temperature, pressure, and composition of the process fluid and intervening materials. where: A = the average cross-sectional area of the measure- ment section (L*) Q = the volumetric flow rate in the measurement section (L3/t) S = a velocity profile correction factor (dimension- less) v,i = the average axial flow velocity along acoustic path i(L/t) Wi = a weighting factor for acoustic path i that is de- pendent on measurement section geometry and acoustic path location (dimensionless) Note that increasing n can reduce the sensitivity of S to flow profiie variations. n = the number of acoustic paths 2.2 Implementation 2.2.1 Primary Device. The primary device consists of a separate spool piece with transducers installed, or an existing section of conduit to which transducers are in- stalled in the field. 2.2.1.1 Measurement Section. The section of con- duit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals is called the measurement section. This section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section located at the extreme up- stream and downstream transducer positions. The mea- surement section is usually circular in cross section; how- ever, it may be square, rectangular, elliptical, or some other shape. 2.2.1.2 Transducers. The transducers transmit and receive acoustic energy. They may be factory rtlounted or field mounted by clamping, threading, or bonding. Transducers may be wetted by the liquid or be non- wetted. Wetted transducers may be flush mounted, re- cessed, or protrude into the flow stream. Some non- wetted transducers may be removed while the line is in service. 2.2.1.3 Acoustic Paths. There may be one (single path) or more (multipath) acoustic paths in the measure- ment section, each having a pair of transducers. Common 3 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Upstream transducer element Downstream transducer element I I MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Intervening material \ \ \ I Measurement I section FIG. 3 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH PROTRUSIONS FIG. 1 WETTED TRANSDUCER CONFIGURATION Intervening material '\ \ Intervening material L?\ FIG. 2 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH FIG. 4 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH CAVITIES SMOOTH BORE 4 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIl-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Single Path Axial Multipath ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Diametric Chordal Chordal Diametric .FIG. 5 ACOUSTIC PATH CONFIGURATIONS types are axial, diametric, and chordal, as shown in Fig. 5. 2.2.2 Secondary Device. The secondary device com- prises the electronic equipment required to operate the transducers, make the measurements, process the mea- sured data, and display or record the results. 2.2.2.1 Operation of Transducers. Transducers may be excited simultaneously or alternately with one or more transmissions in each direction. The acoustic fre- quency and pulse repetition rate may vary. The intercon- necting cable lengths between the secondary and pri- mary devices are an important consideration, and their maximum length is usually defined by the manufacturer. 2.2.2.2 Measurement Method. The transit time of an acoustic pulse is usually taken to be the time interval between initial excitation of the transmitter and some characteristic point of the received signal. Exact details vary from one manufacturer to another. 2.2.2.3 Processing of Data. The processing section, in addition to estimating the flow rate from measured transit times, should be capable of rejecting invalid measurements, noise, etc. The indicated flow rate may be the result of one or more individual flow velocity determinations. 2.2.2.4 Displays and Outputs. Most meters have several outputs available, either as standard features or as optional additions to the equipment. Displays may show flow rate, integrated flow volume and/or direction, and may be analog or digital. Signal outputs usually in- clude one or more of the following: current, voltage, dig- ital, and a pulse rate proportional to flow. These outputs may or may not be electrically isolated. Flowmeters may also include alarms and diagnostic aids. 5 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 3 ERROR SOURCES AND THEIR REDUCTION The purpose of this Section is to describe possible er- ror sources for the ultrasonic flowmeters covered by this Standard. Although these errors may not be significant in some cases, they should all be addressed in detail when analyzing the error for a particular flowmeter. 3.1 Axial Velocity Estimate Axial velocity errors are those errors that are made in the determination of Fax across an acoustic path [see Eqs. (5)-(8)]. . 3.1.1 Acoustic Path Length and Angle. The determi- nation of axial flow velocity (Fa) is based on the acous- tic path length (1,) and angle (6). The error in v, is in direct proportion to the uncertainty in the acoustic path length and angle. Acoustic path length and angle errors may be static due to inaccuracies in the initial measure- ments, or they may be dynamic due to changes in the measurement section or, in the case of refractive sys- tems, changes in the index of refraction of the materials in the acoustic path. Errors in the acoustic path .length or angle for nonre- fractive systems can be reduced by accurate geometric and acoustic measurements. For flowmeters in which sound energy undergoes refraction, errors in acoustic path length or angle can be reduced by design and/or compensation based upon knowledge of the speed of sound in the process liquid and intervening materials be- tween the transducer element and the process liquid. In certain applications, compensation for changes in acoustic path length and angle which result from temper- ature or pressure induced pipe deformation may be pro- vided for in either refractive or nonrefractive systems. Systems where the transducers are field mounted can achieve accuracies comparable to systems where the transducers are factory mounted if precise postinstalla- tion measurements are made and the scaling of the elec- tronics is adjusted to reflect these as-built dimensions. 3.1.2 Transit Time 3.1.2.1 Timing. Uncertainty in the transit-time mea- surement due to limits in internal timing accuracy - and resolution lead to a corresponding uncertainty in V,. Errors in the measurement of transit time may be re- duced by the use of stable and accurate high frequency oscillators and averaging many individual transit-time measurements. Transit-time measurement errors are the most amenable of all potential errors to analysis. Transit-time measurement errors due to differences between upstream to downstream and downstream to upstream electronic signal paths may be reduced by MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS using the same detection electronics and transducer pairs for both directions of propagation. 3.1.2.2 Signal Detection. Acoustic transit-time mea- surements may be affected by inconsistencies in recogni- tion of the received acoustic signal caused by variations in received signal level of waveform and noise. (a) Variations in received signal level or waveform can occur as the acoustic properties of the liquid in the measurement section change because of excessive amounts of entrained air, suspended solids, temperature, pressure, etc., or as transducer fouling occurs. These vari- ations may result in uncertainty in determining the tran- sit time, thus causing uncertainty in V,. (b) Noise can affect the accuracy of the transit-time measurement. Noise sources may be either electrical or acoustic, and either external or self-generated. Generally, externally generated electronic or acoustic noise is ran- dom with respect to the received signal. Self-generated acoustic noise, however, is usually synchronized with the received signal and is therefore much harder to compen- sate for in the secondary device. Signal detection errors are reduced by operating with high signal-to-noise ratios. Methods can be provided that will reject those signals which are excessively attenuated or which are distorted by noise. If the background noise is caused by external sources, the signal-to-noise ratio can be improved by increasing the transmitted signal level. However, in many cases, the most troublesome noise is self-generated acoustic noise. This noise generally increases as the level of the trans- mitted signal is increased. The signal-to-noise ratio, in these cases, may be improved by acoustically isolating the transducers from the measurement section by ap- plication of damping materials and/or other suitable techniques. 3.1.3 Sound Speed Dependency. The speed of sound in the liquid and in any intervening materials along the acoustic path varies with composition, temperature, and pressure. Depending upon a particular ultrasonic flow- meter’s design, I,, 8 , and to (f,) [Eqs. (7) and (811 may be affected. In nearly all cases, the errors caused by sound speed variations in the liquid are negligible for a properly im- plemented, nonrefractive, wetted transducer system. Changes in the speed of sound in the intervening ma- terial may, however, require compensation for non- wetted transducer systems. In refractive systems, changes in the speed of sound in intervening materials and the process liquid affect the acoustic path length and angle. It is possible to compen- sate for these effects. In rare cases, changes in the speed 6 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD / / \ / \ FIG. 6 A TYPICAL CROSS PATH ULTRASONIC FLOWMETER CONFIGURATION (PATHS MAY BE MULTIPATH DIAMETRIC OR CHORDAL) of sound in the liquid may refract the beam so much that it misses the opposing transducer. Accurate knowl- edge of the speed of sound in a particular liquid can reduce this possibility. 3.1.4 Secondary Flow. Secondary flow can produce an error in the determination of v, since it is normally assumed in the calculations that all flow is in the axial direction. Secondary flow is a result of flow perturba- tions occurring upstream or downstream of the measure- ment section because of devices such as elbows, valves, and pumps. Secondary flow may result in an error in determining - the transit time which ultimately affects The most effective way to reduce secondary flow er- rors is to avoid installations where severe secondary flow exists. Reduction of secondary flow may require long, straight runs of pipe and/or the use of flow straighteners, depending upon the nature of the secondary flow source and the accuracy required. Secondary flow errors can also be reduced by the use of an appropriate acoustic path orientation or by computing line velocities on ap- propriate multiple acoustic paths, i.e., crossed paths as illustrated in Fig. 6 , and averaging. vu. 3.2 Integration Integration error is the error in the flow rate estimate which occurs in the computation of the flow rate from Fa,, A , S, and Wi as shown in Eq. (10). 3.2.1 Cross Section Dimensional Errors. Error in the assumed cross-sectional area of the measurement section causes an error in the flow rate estimate. This error may be due to initial measurement section shape irregularities, such as out-of-roundness; or it may be due to changes in the initial shape caused by temperature, pressure, or structural loading. It may also be due to the formation of deposits or growths, such as algae,'in the measurement section. Usually it is due to combinations of the items mentioned above. Cross section dimensional errors can be reduced by manufacturing or choosing a measurement section which has constant dimensions along its length, can be accu- rately measured, and has a stable surface so that cross section changes with time due to corrosion, material buildup, or loss of protective coatings will be small. Additionally, if temperatures or pressures are expected to be substantially different from reference conditions, it may be necessary to adjust the measured dimensions to compensate for dimensional changes that may occur under operating conditions. In circular pipes, cross section dimensional errors can be reduced by minimizing the effects of out-of-roundness through averaging of diameter measurements made at the upstream, middle, and downstream ends of the mea- surement section. The measurement section should be inspected period- ically to determine if the dimensional factor should be adjusted to compensate for observed changes. 3.22 Acoustic Path Location. T h e acoustic path lo- cation, particularly in multipath flowmeters, is an impor- tant contributor to overall flowmeter accuracy. The un- certainty in the position of the acoustic path can cause errors through improper assignment of a weighting fac- tor (Wi) and by causing unnecessary sensitivity of i, to the velocity profile through nonoptimum placement of transducers. Errors due to acoustic path location can be reduced by suitable manufacturing techniques in the case of a prefabricated measurement section or by accurately determining the acoustic path for systems where the transducers are field mounted. Path locations can be 7 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD determined in a variety of ways, but probably the most accurate involves optical determination of both the acoustic path location and angle within the measurement section. 3.2.3 Velocity Profile. Ultrasonic flowmeters are af- fected by variations in flow profile because uncertainty in the velocity profile causes an error in that may not be compensated for by the velocity profile correc- tion factor S. This error may affect both the linearity and the value of the flow rate estimate. Velocity profile variations can be caused by changes in flow rate (both transient and steady state), wall roughness, temperature, viscosity, upstream or downstream hydraulic conditions, transducer projections, and transducer cavities. In the absence of upstream and downstream hydraulic effects, the Reynolds number and friction factor of the measure- ment section would be sufficient to determine the veloc- ity profile correction factor S. There usually is a difference between the actual ve- locity profile and that assumed in the flowmeter’s com- putations. Since most flowmeter computations assume a fully developed velocity profile, errors can be reduced by placing the measurement section as far as possible from bends, valves, tees, transitions, etc. These errors can also be reduced by using a more accurate model of the actual velocity profile, or in general, by increasing the number of acoustic paths. 3.3 Computation There is a degree of error associated with the compu- tations made by the electronic circuits because of the finite limits in processing accuracies. However, this error will normally be negligible. Computation errors due to electronics malfunction can be reduced by using built-in, self-checking features in the processor. 3.4 Calibration Calibration is an alternative means for reducing errors resulting from uncertainties in path length and angle, cross section, and path location. Velocity profile errors can be corrected with in situ calibration or by properly simulated laboratory calibrations. There is an uncertainty in the flow rate estimate that results from errors .involved in the procedure used to calibrate an ultrasonic flowmeter. To reduce calibration uncertainty, calibration should be conducted according to national (ANSI) or international (ISO) standards. MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 3.5 Equipment Degradation Performance errors may arise due to fouling or phys- ical degradation of the equipment. Equipment design should include reasonable tolerance to changes in com- ponent values and process conditions. The equipment should also indicate when degradation of flowmeter performance occurs. The probability of error can be reduced considerably by including suitable self-test or diagnostic circuits in the equipment. 4 APPLICATION GUIDELINES 4.1 Performance Parameters By evaluating the performance parameters listed below, a user should be better able to predict the per- formance of a given ultrasonic flowmeter in a specific application, as well as compare its performance to other ultrasonic flowmeters. These parameters are limited to those which can be substantiated by test or well- established computational methods. (It should be em- phasized that the following performance parameters are normally determined by the manufacturer under specific reference conditions that will, in general, differ from the user’s actual conditions.) Subjective or nonperformance parameters, such as convenience of installation, reliabil- ity, and cost, are left to the individual user for evalua- tion. In each case below, the range and conditions ap- plicable to each parameter should be specified. 4.1.1 Accuracy. Accuracy describes the uncertainty of a measured value as compared to its true value and is commonly reported as a percentage of actual flow, spap, or full scale. The preferred method is to specify the max- imum deviation (in percent) between measured flow and actual flow (see also ANSI/ASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes). 4.1.2 Linearity. The data obtained by test of any in- strument consists of points scattered around a smooth curve that represents the nominal characteristic of the instrument. Linearity is the maximum deviation, at any flow rate, of that smooth curve from a least squares lin- ear fit to the data and should be reported as a percentage of that flow rate. 4.1.3 Repeatability. Repeatability is the ability of a flowmeter to return to a previously indicated flow rate after a deviation in either direction from and return to the flow conditions which caused that indicated flow rate. It also includes readout variations under constant flow conditions. Repeatability should be reported as the maximum expected deviation between these indicated flow rates expressed as a percentage of the flow rate 8 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS indication (see also ANSI/ASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes). 4.1.4 Stability. Stability is a measure of change in ac- curacy with time. It should be reported as the maximum deviation in accuracy, as a percentage of actual flow, which can be expected to occur over a specified time period (subject to constant hydraulic conditions). 4.1.5 Resolution. Resolution is the minimum change in actual flow required to produce an observable change in the output of the equipment. 4.1.6 Rangeability. Rangeability is the maximum and minimum flow rates over which the performance is spec- ified (see also ANSI/ASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes). 4.1.7. Response Time. Response time is the time it takes, following a step change in the flow rate, for the flowmeter’s output to indicate a change in flow rate equal to 63% of the step change. 4.1.8 Power Requirements. The power requirements of the flowmeter, including voltage and frequency toler- ances necessary for proper performance, as well as the flowmeter’s power consumption, should be clearly specified. 4.2 Installation Considerations 4.2.1 Introduction. Many of the error sources listed in Section 3 can be reduced or eliminated by proper instal- lation. Errors the user should address during the design phase of a project are listed below. 4.2.2 Acoustic Path Length and Angle. Changes in acoustic path length and angle can be caused by signifi- cant temperature or pressure changes as well as external loading of the meter section. The installation location should be chosen to minimize these effects. 4.2.3 Signal Detection. Suspended solids, fouling, en- trained air, or cavitation (caused by upstream equipment or even the meter itself) may degrade accuracy or pre- vent operation by attenuating the acoustic signal. Elec- trical interference and acoustic noise caused by mechan- ical vibration or cavitation can also interfere with the meter’s operation. 4.2.4 Multiple Fluids. Metering fluids with widely dif- fering acoustic properties may require multiple primary devices (spool pieces) due to excessive acoustic beam an- gular variations in refractive systems and/or excessive signal loss due to acoustic mismatch or attenuation. Under these conditions the manufacturer should be consulted. ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 4.2.5 Secondary Flow. Secondary flow directly af- fects a meter’s performance and should be considered in the design of the installation and in the selection and orientation of a meter. In general, the meter should be placed as far as possible from upstream elbows, transi- tions, valves, etc. 4.2.6 Integration. Flow profile changes and dimen- sional changes in the measurement section, including those caused by corrosion, erosion, or material buildup, directly affect meter performance and should be con- sidered in the selection, location, and orientation of a meter. The measurement section should be inspected period- ically to determine if the cross section area factor K or profile correction factor S should be adjusted to com- pensate for observed changes. 4.2.7 Calibration. Installation considerations and the required installed accuracy usually determine the method of calibration. 5 METER FACTOR DETERMINATION AND VERIFICATION There are three principal methods of meter factor (a) laboratory calibration (b) field calibration (c) analytical procedures determination: The first two can be used to verify meter performance. 5.1 Laboratory Calibration Laboratory calibrations should be conducted at fa- cilities where the procedures are in accordance with national or international standards. The calibration tests should generally be run using water that is free from acoustically interfering entrained air or solid particles. Standard calibrations should be conducted using flows that are as free as possible from swirl, nonaxisymmetric flow, and pulsation. Generally, these conditions have been achieved by using sufficient lengths of straight pipe upstream and downstream of the measurement section and, if necessary, by installing up- stream flow conditioners. The extent to which the above conditions have been achieved can be determined by noting the sensitivity of the meter factor to rotation and translation of the pri- mary device. A statistically significant number of runs should be made over a range of flow rates. Flowmeter accuracy, 9 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD within the uncertainty of the laboratory standards, should be determined by the combined random and sys- tematic errors in the measurement of the volumetric flow rate. Special calibration tests may also be performed for those cases where the piping in the final installation may produce nonaxisymmetric flow or where other flow ir- regularities are suspected. This will require appropriate modeling of upstream and downstream piping. 5.2 Field Calibration Field calibration, as opposed to laboratory calibration, has 'the advantage that true operating conditions are encountered. The major disadvantage may be a greater MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS degree. of uncertainty in the accuracy of the standards that are employed. In some cases, these secondary stan- dards may be considerably less accurate than the ultra- sonic flowmeter being calibrated. 5.3 Analytical Procedures Analytical procedures are often the only available technique for meter factor determination. This is partic- ularly true for very high flow rates and large line sizes. These procedures require physical measurements as well as instructions and data supplied by the manufacturer. The uncertainty in the meter performance should reflect uncertainties associated with these procedures as well as those error sources outlined in Section 3. 10 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled APPENDIX A ACOUSTIC TRANSIT TIME IN A NONUNIFORM FLUID VELOCITY FIELD (This Appendix is not an integral part of ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 and is included for information purposes only.) In the case of a nonuniform axial flow field, it can be shown that the length 1 of the acoustic path, which in this case is not a straight line, is given to second order by: where 1, is the straight line distance connecting the centers of the faces of the acoustic trans- mitter and receiver (see Fig. 1) and where 8, is the angle of 1, with respect to the pipe axis, and vax and Vax2 are averages of the liquid axial velocity profile. To the degree that a << 1, the effective path of the acoustic ray can be taken to be a straight line equal to I,. This being the case, the apparent speed of sound at any given point, for an acoustic pulse traveling upstream along this straight line path, is given bY - while that for the downstream pulse is given by The transit times for upstream and downstream acoustic pulses (tup, tdown) are given respectively by: 11 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w and To the extent that (V, IC,)' << 1, these equations reduce to - and where Taking the difference of the reciprocal of these transit times leads to 2V, cos eo 1, [1- cosz eo ($J] - N To the extent that cos' Bo ( v,/Co)' << 1, this result reduces to ) - At cos eo tdown tup where At = tup - tdown. The above relationship is valid to the degree that the following three conditions are met: 12 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w Assuming the worst case, i.e., that velocity profile which results in the most stringent condi- tions, these inequalities reduce to: In most practical cases the middle condition is the limiting one. 13 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w APPENDIX B SELECTION GUIDELINES (This Appendix is not an integral part of ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 and is included for information purposes only.) This Appendix is intended to assist in selecting the most appropriate ultrasonic flowmeter for a particular application. Since there are many variations and differ- ences even among the same types of flowmeters, this Appendix addresses itself only to the major differences between the types. It is suggested that the application conditions be discussed with the manufacturers prior to a decision on a particular type of flowmeter. B1 SINGLE PATH VERSUS MULTIPATH INSTRUMENTS Single path instruments are usually lower in cost than multipath instruments. They are also less complex, and therefore usually somewhat simpler to install. Multipath flowmeters can exhibit better performance than single path meters under the variable and/or nonideal velocity profile distribution conditions caused by changing Reyn- olds number, changes in friction factor, and the effects caused by upstream and downstream elbows, valves, or other sources of flow disturbance. The choice of path orientations varies among manufacturers. It can be either crossed or parallel, either chordal or diametric. Choice of the most appropriate path distribution should be made after a full discussion of the application conditions with the various manufacturers. B2 EXTERNALLY MOUNTED VERSUS INSERT-TYPE TRANSDUCERS Externally mounted transducers are the simplest to install on existing pipe and, since they do not require any extensive pipe preparation, are less expensive to install than insert systems. Since the pipe inner wall is undisturbed, there is no flow disturbance in the vicinity of the transducers. They can also be easily removed with- out requiring shutdown of the process. Since these sys- tems utilize a beam that refracts into the liquid, they may be affected by variations in the sonic properties of the liquid and the pipe. The manufacturer should be contacted to ensure that the expected application con- ditions can be handled with satisfactory performance. Insert type systems can be of two types - those using wetted transducers and those where the transducers are installed in a protective well. Where the transducer faces and protective surfaces are orthogonal to the acoustic path, these systems can offer greater immunity to changes in the sonic velocity of the liquid since refrac- tion of the beam does not take place. Since these sys- tems usually either have the transducer recessed in a cavity or protruding into the liquid beyond the pipe wall, a local flow disturbance results which may affect the meters performance. Although reportedly rare, the transducer cavity could collect debris. Those insert systems where this well is filed with a protective window result in refraction of the beam through the liquid and require either relatively constant sonic velocity or compensation in the secondary device. NOTE: If very large changes in sonic velocity occur, refaaction may cause the sonic beam to miss the opposing transduces. Insert type systems may provide greater acoustic power since they avoid the transmission loss through the pipe wall. They may also, in some cases, offer a greater signal-to-noise ratio since they avoid some of the pipe borne, self-generated noise which may affect externally installed systems. 14 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	6	6
7	Appendices	CONTENTS ... Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111 Committee Roster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v 1 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2 Flowmeter Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 3 Error Sources and Their Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 4 Application Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 5 Meter Factor Determination and Verification .......................... 9 Figures 1 Wetted Transducer Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2 Protected Configuration With Cavities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 3 Protected Configuration With Protrusions ............................. 4 4 Protected Configuration With Smooth Bore ............................ 4 5 Acoustic Path Configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 6 A Typical Cross Path Ultrasonic Flowmeter Configuration (Paths May Be Multipath Diametric or Chordal) ............................ 7 Appendices A Acoustic Transit Time in a Nonuniform Fluid Velocity Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 B Selection Guidelines ........................................... 14 vii Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 1 GENERAL 1.1 Scope This Standard applies only to ultrasonic flowmeters that base their operation on the measurement of transit times of acoustic signals. Further, this Standard concerns only the application of such meters when used to mea- sure the volumetric flow rate of a liquid exhibiting homogeneous acoustic properties and flowing in a com- pletely fdled closed conduit. Not covered by this Standard are ultrasonic flow- meters that derive volumetric flow rate from measure- ments of the deviation, scattering (Doppler flowmeter), or correlation of acoustic signals. 1.2 Purpose This Standard provides: (a) a description of the operating principles employed (b) a description of error sources and performance (c) a common set of terminology, symbols, defini- by the ultrasonic flowmeters covered in this Standard; verification procedures; tions, and specifications. 1.3 Terminology, Symbols, and Definitions Terminology and symbols used in this Standard, except for those defined below, are in accordance with ANWASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes. acoustic path - the path that the acoustic signals follow as they propagate through the measurement section be- tween the transducer elements axid flow velocity (Vax) - the component of liquid flow velocity at a point in the measurement section that is parallel to the measurement section’s axis and in the direction of the flow being measured cross flow velocity - the component of liquid flow ve- locity at a point in the measurement section that is per- pendicular to the measurement section’s axis measurement section - the section of conduit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals. The measurement section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section and lo- cated at the extreme upstream and downstream trans- ducer positions. nonrefractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid inter- faces at a right angle refractive system - an ultrasonic flowmeter in which the acoustic path crosses the solid/process liquid interfaces at other than a right angle transducer - the combination of the transducer element and passive materials transducer element - an active component that pro- duces either acoustic output in response to an electric stimulus and/or an electric output in response to an acoustic stimulus transit time (t) - the time required for an acoustic signal to traverse an acoustic path velocity profire correction factor (S) - a dimensionless factor based on measured knowledge of the velocity pro- file used to adjust the meter output 2 FLOWMETER DESCRIPTION The transit-time ultrasonic flowmeter being con- sidered in this Standard is a complete system composed of the primary device, which is a measurement section with one or more pairs of transducers, and the secondary device, which is the electronic equipment necessary to operate the transducers, make the measurements, pro- cess the measured data, and display or record results. 1 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 2.1 Operating Principles 2.1.1 Introduction. At any given instant, the differ- ence between the apparent speed of sound in a moving liquid and the speed of sound in that same liquid at rest is directly proportional to the liquid’s instantaneous velocity. As a consequence, a measure of the average velocity of the liquid along a path can be obtained by transmitting an acoustic pulse along the path and sub- sequently measuring its transit time. The volumetric flow rate of a liquid flowing in a com- pletely filled closed conduit is defined as the average velocity of the liquid over a cross section multiplied by the area of the cross section. Thus, by measuring the average velocity of a liquid along one or more acoustic paths and combining the measurements with knowledge of the cross-sectional area and the velocity profile over the cross section, it is possible to obtain an estimate of the volumetric flow rate of the liquid in the conduit. The theoretical considerations involved in implement- ing these concepts is the subject of this section. 2.1.2 Fluid Velocity Measurement. Several techniques can be used to obtain a measure of the average effective speed of propagation of an acoustic pulse in a moving liquid in-order to determine the average axial flow ve- locity (V,) along an acoustic path. Two approaches, transit-time difference and frequency difference, will be discussed here. 2.1.2.1 Transit-Time Difference. The basis of this technique is the direct measurement of the transit time of acoustic signals as they propagate between a trans- mitter and a receiver, both of which are assumed (see para. 2.1.3) to be in direct contact with the liquid. Dif- ferent transmitter/receiver arrangements are described in para. 2.1.3 below. For an acoustic signal traveling up- stream, the apparent sound speed at any point along the line of transmission, assuming only axial flow, is where C, is the speed of sound in the liquid at rest, 6 is the angle between the acoustic path and V,, and V, is the axial flow velocity at the point in question (see Fig. 1). For a downstream pulse, In the ideal case of plug flow, V,, is constant through- out the liquid and the acoustic path is a straight line, i.e., 0 = constant = 8, (path angle for fluid at rest). MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Consequently, Cup and CdO- are both constants along the acoustic path. In this case the upstream and down- stream transit times(tup, tdo-) are given respectively by: tup = (3) c, ++ - v, cos eo and (4) sin’ e, + V , cos e, where 1, is the straight line distance between the centers of the faces of the acoustic transmitter and receiver. Taking the difference between the reciprocals of these transit times leads to 1 1 2va, cos e, - tdown tup IO and, on rearranging, to where At = tup - tdown. Since v,, is constant, v, = v,, (the average flow velocity). This analysis becomes more complicated in the ab- sence of plug flow. Nevertheless, to the degree that (Vax/Co)&ax. << 1, the result for the average of the axial liquid velocity along the acoustic path (v,) is identical (see Appendix A), i.e., - 2.1.2.2 Frequency Difference. In a frequency differ- ence measurement approach, the reception of an acous- tic signal at the receiver is used as a reference for gener- ating a subsequent acoustic signal at the transmitter. Assuming no delays other than the propagation time of the acoustic pulses in the liquid, the frequency at which the pulses are generated or received is proportional to the reciprocal of their transit time. The equations derived in the previous paragraph are equally valid in this case, the 2 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD transit time being replaced by the reciprocal of a con- 2.1.4 Estimating Volumetric Flow. Once the average stant (Kf) times the frequencies, i.e., axial flow velocity along an acoustic path has been found, the volumetric flow rate can be calculated from - Kf 10 the following equation: v, = (fdown - fup) (6) 2 cos eo n 2.1.3 Transducer Considerations. In the preceding paragraph it was assumed that the transducer element was in direct contact with the liquid and that the acous- tic signal was propagated normal to the transducer/liquid interface. In most’ cases it is desirable to protect the transducer element from the process liquid by using in- tervening materials (see Figs. 2 and 3). If such an ar- rangement is employed, Eq. (5) takes the following form: where to, a function of temperature, is the transit time of the acoustic signals in the intervening materials. The equation appropriate to the frequency difference technique must also be modified: where fo is equal to 1 /to. Use of an intervening material also allows the possibil- ity of acoustic signals entering and leaving the liquid along a path that is not normal to the solid/liquid inter- face. For example, the intervening material could be flush with the inside surface of the conduit as in Fig. 4. This further complicates the acoustic analysis.since not only the corrections mentioned above, but also correc- tions for the refraction of the acoustic signals at the solid/liquid interface must be introduced. This refraction takes place according to Snell’s Law, i.e., where C is the sound speed in the liquid and Cp is the sound speed in the intervening material. As a conse- quence, 0 and to (f,) in Eqs. (7) and (8) now become functions of the sound speeds (C, Cp), and hence, in gen- eral, of the temperature, pressure, and composition of the process fluid and intervening materials. where: A = the average cross-sectional area of the measure- ment section (L*) Q = the volumetric flow rate in the measurement section (L3/t) S = a velocity profile correction factor (dimension- less) v,i = the average axial flow velocity along acoustic path i(L/t) Wi = a weighting factor for acoustic path i that is de- pendent on measurement section geometry and acoustic path location (dimensionless) Note that increasing n can reduce the sensitivity of S to flow profiie variations. n = the number of acoustic paths 2.2 Implementation 2.2.1 Primary Device. The primary device consists of a separate spool piece with transducers installed, or an existing section of conduit to which transducers are in- stalled in the field. 2.2.1.1 Measurement Section. The section of con- duit in which the volumetric flow rate is sensed by the acoustic signals is called the measurement section. This section is bounded at both ends by planes perpendicular to the axis of the section located at the extreme up- stream and downstream transducer positions. The mea- surement section is usually circular in cross section; how- ever, it may be square, rectangular, elliptical, or some other shape. 2.2.1.2 Transducers. The transducers transmit and receive acoustic energy. They may be factory rtlounted or field mounted by clamping, threading, or bonding. Transducers may be wetted by the liquid or be non- wetted. Wetted transducers may be flush mounted, re- cessed, or protrude into the flow stream. Some non- wetted transducers may be removed while the line is in service. 2.2.1.3 Acoustic Paths. There may be one (single path) or more (multipath) acoustic paths in the measure- ment section, each having a pair of transducers. Common 3 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Upstream transducer element Downstream transducer element I I MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Intervening material \ \ \ I Measurement I section FIG. 3 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH PROTRUSIONS FIG. 1 WETTED TRANSDUCER CONFIGURATION Intervening material '\ \ Intervening material L?\ FIG. 2 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH FIG. 4 PROTECTED CONFIGURATION WITH CAVITIES SMOOTH BORE 4 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIl-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS Single Path Axial Multipath ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Diametric Chordal Chordal Diametric .FIG. 5 ACOUSTIC PATH CONFIGURATIONS types are axial, diametric, and chordal, as shown in Fig. 5. 2.2.2 Secondary Device. The secondary device com- prises the electronic equipment required to operate the transducers, make the measurements, process the mea- sured data, and display or record the results. 2.2.2.1 Operation of Transducers. Transducers may be excited simultaneously or alternately with one or more transmissions in each direction. The acoustic fre- quency and pulse repetition rate may vary. The intercon- necting cable lengths between the secondary and pri- mary devices are an important consideration, and their maximum length is usually defined by the manufacturer. 2.2.2.2 Measurement Method. The transit time of an acoustic pulse is usually taken to be the time interval between initial excitation of the transmitter and some characteristic point of the received signal. Exact details vary from one manufacturer to another. 2.2.2.3 Processing of Data. The processing section, in addition to estimating the flow rate from measured transit times, should be capable of rejecting invalid measurements, noise, etc. The indicated flow rate may be the result of one or more individual flow velocity determinations. 2.2.2.4 Displays and Outputs. Most meters have several outputs available, either as standard features or as optional additions to the equipment. Displays may show flow rate, integrated flow volume and/or direction, and may be analog or digital. Signal outputs usually in- clude one or more of the following: current, voltage, dig- ital, and a pulse rate proportional to flow. These outputs may or may not be electrically isolated. Flowmeters may also include alarms and diagnostic aids. 5 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSIIASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 3 ERROR SOURCES AND THEIR REDUCTION The purpose of this Section is to describe possible er- ror sources for the ultrasonic flowmeters covered by this Standard. Although these errors may not be significant in some cases, they should all be addressed in detail when analyzing the error for a particular flowmeter. 3.1 Axial Velocity Estimate Axial velocity errors are those errors that are made in the determination of Fax across an acoustic path [see Eqs. (5)-(8)]. . 3.1.1 Acoustic Path Length and Angle. The determi- nation of axial flow velocity (Fa) is based on the acous- tic path length (1,) and angle (6). The error in v, is in direct proportion to the uncertainty in the acoustic path length and angle. Acoustic path length and angle errors may be static due to inaccuracies in the initial measure- ments, or they may be dynamic due to changes in the measurement section or, in the case of refractive sys- tems, changes in the index of refraction of the materials in the acoustic path. Errors in the acoustic path .length or angle for nonre- fractive systems can be reduced by accurate geometric and acoustic measurements. For flowmeters in which sound energy undergoes refraction, errors in acoustic path length or angle can be reduced by design and/or compensation based upon knowledge of the speed of sound in the process liquid and intervening materials be- tween the transducer element and the process liquid. In certain applications, compensation for changes in acoustic path length and angle which result from temper- ature or pressure induced pipe deformation may be pro- vided for in either refractive or nonrefractive systems. Systems where the transducers are field mounted can achieve accuracies comparable to systems where the transducers are factory mounted if precise postinstalla- tion measurements are made and the scaling of the elec- tronics is adjusted to reflect these as-built dimensions. 3.1.2 Transit Time 3.1.2.1 Timing. Uncertainty in the transit-time mea- surement due to limits in internal timing accuracy - and resolution lead to a corresponding uncertainty in V,. Errors in the measurement of transit time may be re- duced by the use of stable and accurate high frequency oscillators and averaging many individual transit-time measurements. Transit-time measurement errors are the most amenable of all potential errors to analysis. Transit-time measurement errors due to differences between upstream to downstream and downstream to upstream electronic signal paths may be reduced by MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS using the same detection electronics and transducer pairs for both directions of propagation. 3.1.2.2 Signal Detection. Acoustic transit-time mea- surements may be affected by inconsistencies in recogni- tion of the received acoustic signal caused by variations in received signal level of waveform and noise. (a) Variations in received signal level or waveform can occur as the acoustic properties of the liquid in the measurement section change because of excessive amounts of entrained air, suspended solids, temperature, pressure, etc., or as transducer fouling occurs. These vari- ations may result in uncertainty in determining the tran- sit time, thus causing uncertainty in V,. (b) Noise can affect the accuracy of the transit-time measurement. Noise sources may be either electrical or acoustic, and either external or self-generated. Generally, externally generated electronic or acoustic noise is ran- dom with respect to the received signal. Self-generated acoustic noise, however, is usually synchronized with the received signal and is therefore much harder to compen- sate for in the secondary device. Signal detection errors are reduced by operating with high signal-to-noise ratios. Methods can be provided that will reject those signals which are excessively attenuated or which are distorted by noise. If the background noise is caused by external sources, the signal-to-noise ratio can be improved by increasing the transmitted signal level. However, in many cases, the most troublesome noise is self-generated acoustic noise. This noise generally increases as the level of the trans- mitted signal is increased. The signal-to-noise ratio, in these cases, may be improved by acoustically isolating the transducers from the measurement section by ap- plication of damping materials and/or other suitable techniques. 3.1.3 Sound Speed Dependency. The speed of sound in the liquid and in any intervening materials along the acoustic path varies with composition, temperature, and pressure. Depending upon a particular ultrasonic flow- meter’s design, I,, 8 , and to (f,) [Eqs. (7) and (811 may be affected. In nearly all cases, the errors caused by sound speed variations in the liquid are negligible for a properly im- plemented, nonrefractive, wetted transducer system. Changes in the speed of sound in the intervening ma- terial may, however, require compensation for non- wetted transducer systems. In refractive systems, changes in the speed of sound in intervening materials and the process liquid affect the acoustic path length and angle. It is possible to compen- sate for these effects. In rare cases, changes in the speed 6 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD / / \ / \ FIG. 6 A TYPICAL CROSS PATH ULTRASONIC FLOWMETER CONFIGURATION (PATHS MAY BE MULTIPATH DIAMETRIC OR CHORDAL) of sound in the liquid may refract the beam so much that it misses the opposing transducer. Accurate knowl- edge of the speed of sound in a particular liquid can reduce this possibility. 3.1.4 Secondary Flow. Secondary flow can produce an error in the determination of v, since it is normally assumed in the calculations that all flow is in the axial direction. Secondary flow is a result of flow perturba- tions occurring upstream or downstream of the measure- ment section because of devices such as elbows, valves, and pumps. Secondary flow may result in an error in determining - the transit time which ultimately affects The most effective way to reduce secondary flow er- rors is to avoid installations where severe secondary flow exists. Reduction of secondary flow may require long, straight runs of pipe and/or the use of flow straighteners, depending upon the nature of the secondary flow source and the accuracy required. Secondary flow errors can also be reduced by the use of an appropriate acoustic path orientation or by computing line velocities on ap- propriate multiple acoustic paths, i.e., crossed paths as illustrated in Fig. 6 , and averaging. vu. 3.2 Integration Integration error is the error in the flow rate estimate which occurs in the computation of the flow rate from Fa,, A , S, and Wi as shown in Eq. (10). 3.2.1 Cross Section Dimensional Errors. Error in the assumed cross-sectional area of the measurement section causes an error in the flow rate estimate. This error may be due to initial measurement section shape irregularities, such as out-of-roundness; or it may be due to changes in the initial shape caused by temperature, pressure, or structural loading. It may also be due to the formation of deposits or growths, such as algae,'in the measurement section. Usually it is due to combinations of the items mentioned above. Cross section dimensional errors can be reduced by manufacturing or choosing a measurement section which has constant dimensions along its length, can be accu- rately measured, and has a stable surface so that cross section changes with time due to corrosion, material buildup, or loss of protective coatings will be small. Additionally, if temperatures or pressures are expected to be substantially different from reference conditions, it may be necessary to adjust the measured dimensions to compensate for dimensional changes that may occur under operating conditions. In circular pipes, cross section dimensional errors can be reduced by minimizing the effects of out-of-roundness through averaging of diameter measurements made at the upstream, middle, and downstream ends of the mea- surement section. The measurement section should be inspected period- ically to determine if the dimensional factor should be adjusted to compensate for observed changes. 3.22 Acoustic Path Location. T h e acoustic path lo- cation, particularly in multipath flowmeters, is an impor- tant contributor to overall flowmeter accuracy. The un- certainty in the position of the acoustic path can cause errors through improper assignment of a weighting fac- tor (Wi) and by causing unnecessary sensitivity of i, to the velocity profile through nonoptimum placement of transducers. Errors due to acoustic path location can be reduced by suitable manufacturing techniques in the case of a prefabricated measurement section or by accurately determining the acoustic path for systems where the transducers are field mounted. Path locations can be 7 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD determined in a variety of ways, but probably the most accurate involves optical determination of both the acoustic path location and angle within the measurement section. 3.2.3 Velocity Profile. Ultrasonic flowmeters are af- fected by variations in flow profile because uncertainty in the velocity profile causes an error in that may not be compensated for by the velocity profile correc- tion factor S. This error may affect both the linearity and the value of the flow rate estimate. Velocity profile variations can be caused by changes in flow rate (both transient and steady state), wall roughness, temperature, viscosity, upstream or downstream hydraulic conditions, transducer projections, and transducer cavities. In the absence of upstream and downstream hydraulic effects, the Reynolds number and friction factor of the measure- ment section would be sufficient to determine the veloc- ity profile correction factor S. There usually is a difference between the actual ve- locity profile and that assumed in the flowmeter’s com- putations. Since most flowmeter computations assume a fully developed velocity profile, errors can be reduced by placing the measurement section as far as possible from bends, valves, tees, transitions, etc. These errors can also be reduced by using a more accurate model of the actual velocity profile, or in general, by increasing the number of acoustic paths. 3.3 Computation There is a degree of error associated with the compu- tations made by the electronic circuits because of the finite limits in processing accuracies. However, this error will normally be negligible. Computation errors due to electronics malfunction can be reduced by using built-in, self-checking features in the processor. 3.4 Calibration Calibration is an alternative means for reducing errors resulting from uncertainties in path length and angle, cross section, and path location. Velocity profile errors can be corrected with in situ calibration or by properly simulated laboratory calibrations. There is an uncertainty in the flow rate estimate that results from errors .involved in the procedure used to calibrate an ultrasonic flowmeter. To reduce calibration uncertainty, calibration should be conducted according to national (ANSI) or international (ISO) standards. MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS 3.5 Equipment Degradation Performance errors may arise due to fouling or phys- ical degradation of the equipment. Equipment design should include reasonable tolerance to changes in com- ponent values and process conditions. The equipment should also indicate when degradation of flowmeter performance occurs. The probability of error can be reduced considerably by including suitable self-test or diagnostic circuits in the equipment. 4 APPLICATION GUIDELINES 4.1 Performance Parameters By evaluating the performance parameters listed below, a user should be better able to predict the per- formance of a given ultrasonic flowmeter in a specific application, as well as compare its performance to other ultrasonic flowmeters. These parameters are limited to those which can be substantiated by test or well- established computational methods. (It should be em- phasized that the following performance parameters are normally determined by the manufacturer under specific reference conditions that will, in general, differ from the user’s actual conditions.) Subjective or nonperformance parameters, such as convenience of installation, reliabil- ity, and cost, are left to the individual user for evalua- tion. In each case below, the range and conditions ap- plicable to each parameter should be specified. 4.1.1 Accuracy. Accuracy describes the uncertainty of a measured value as compared to its true value and is commonly reported as a percentage of actual flow, spap, or full scale. The preferred method is to specify the max- imum deviation (in percent) between measured flow and actual flow (see also ANSI/ASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes). 4.1.2 Linearity. The data obtained by test of any in- strument consists of points scattered around a smooth curve that represents the nominal characteristic of the instrument. Linearity is the maximum deviation, at any flow rate, of that smooth curve from a least squares lin- ear fit to the data and should be reported as a percentage of that flow rate. 4.1.3 Repeatability. Repeatability is the ability of a flowmeter to return to a previously indicated flow rate after a deviation in either direction from and return to the flow conditions which caused that indicated flow rate. It also includes readout variations under constant flow conditions. Repeatability should be reported as the maximum expected deviation between these indicated flow rates expressed as a percentage of the flow rate 8 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS indication (see also ANSI/ASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes). 4.1.4 Stability. Stability is a measure of change in ac- curacy with time. It should be reported as the maximum deviation in accuracy, as a percentage of actual flow, which can be expected to occur over a specified time period (subject to constant hydraulic conditions). 4.1.5 Resolution. Resolution is the minimum change in actual flow required to produce an observable change in the output of the equipment. 4.1.6 Rangeability. Rangeability is the maximum and minimum flow rates over which the performance is spec- ified (see also ANSI/ASME MFC-lM, Glossary of Terms Used in the Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes). 4.1.7. Response Time. Response time is the time it takes, following a step change in the flow rate, for the flowmeter’s output to indicate a change in flow rate equal to 63% of the step change. 4.1.8 Power Requirements. The power requirements of the flowmeter, including voltage and frequency toler- ances necessary for proper performance, as well as the flowmeter’s power consumption, should be clearly specified. 4.2 Installation Considerations 4.2.1 Introduction. Many of the error sources listed in Section 3 can be reduced or eliminated by proper instal- lation. Errors the user should address during the design phase of a project are listed below. 4.2.2 Acoustic Path Length and Angle. Changes in acoustic path length and angle can be caused by signifi- cant temperature or pressure changes as well as external loading of the meter section. The installation location should be chosen to minimize these effects. 4.2.3 Signal Detection. Suspended solids, fouling, en- trained air, or cavitation (caused by upstream equipment or even the meter itself) may degrade accuracy or pre- vent operation by attenuating the acoustic signal. Elec- trical interference and acoustic noise caused by mechan- ical vibration or cavitation can also interfere with the meter’s operation. 4.2.4 Multiple Fluids. Metering fluids with widely dif- fering acoustic properties may require multiple primary devices (spool pieces) due to excessive acoustic beam an- gular variations in refractive systems and/or excessive signal loss due to acoustic mismatch or attenuation. Under these conditions the manufacturer should be consulted. ANSI/ASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD 4.2.5 Secondary Flow. Secondary flow directly af- fects a meter’s performance and should be considered in the design of the installation and in the selection and orientation of a meter. In general, the meter should be placed as far as possible from upstream elbows, transi- tions, valves, etc. 4.2.6 Integration. Flow profile changes and dimen- sional changes in the measurement section, including those caused by corrosion, erosion, or material buildup, directly affect meter performance and should be con- sidered in the selection, location, and orientation of a meter. The measurement section should be inspected period- ically to determine if the cross section area factor K or profile correction factor S should be adjusted to com- pensate for observed changes. 4.2.7 Calibration. Installation considerations and the required installed accuracy usually determine the method of calibration. 5 METER FACTOR DETERMINATION AND VERIFICATION There are three principal methods of meter factor (a) laboratory calibration (b) field calibration (c) analytical procedures determination: The first two can be used to verify meter performance. 5.1 Laboratory Calibration Laboratory calibrations should be conducted at fa- cilities where the procedures are in accordance with national or international standards. The calibration tests should generally be run using water that is free from acoustically interfering entrained air or solid particles. Standard calibrations should be conducted using flows that are as free as possible from swirl, nonaxisymmetric flow, and pulsation. Generally, these conditions have been achieved by using sufficient lengths of straight pipe upstream and downstream of the measurement section and, if necessary, by installing up- stream flow conditioners. The extent to which the above conditions have been achieved can be determined by noting the sensitivity of the meter factor to rotation and translation of the pri- mary device. A statistically significant number of runs should be made over a range of flow rates. Flowmeter accuracy, 9 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 AN AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD within the uncertainty of the laboratory standards, should be determined by the combined random and sys- tematic errors in the measurement of the volumetric flow rate. Special calibration tests may also be performed for those cases where the piping in the final installation may produce nonaxisymmetric flow or where other flow ir- regularities are suspected. This will require appropriate modeling of upstream and downstream piping. 5.2 Field Calibration Field calibration, as opposed to laboratory calibration, has 'the advantage that true operating conditions are encountered. The major disadvantage may be a greater MEASUREMENT OF LIQUID FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS USING TRANSIT-TIME ULTRASONIC FLOWMETERS degree. of uncertainty in the accuracy of the standards that are employed. In some cases, these secondary stan- dards may be considerably less accurate than the ultra- sonic flowmeter being calibrated. 5.3 Analytical Procedures Analytical procedures are often the only available technique for meter factor determination. This is partic- ularly true for very high flow rates and large line sizes. These procedures require physical measurements as well as instructions and data supplied by the manufacturer. The uncertainty in the meter performance should reflect uncertainties associated with these procedures as well as those error sources outlined in Section 3. 10 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled APPENDIX A ACOUSTIC TRANSIT TIME IN A NONUNIFORM FLUID VELOCITY FIELD (This Appendix is not an integral part of ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 and is included for information purposes only.) In the case of a nonuniform axial flow field, it can be shown that the length 1 of the acoustic path, which in this case is not a straight line, is given to second order by: where 1, is the straight line distance connecting the centers of the faces of the acoustic trans- mitter and receiver (see Fig. 1) and where 8, is the angle of 1, with respect to the pipe axis, and vax and Vax2 are averages of the liquid axial velocity profile. To the degree that a << 1, the effective path of the acoustic ray can be taken to be a straight line equal to I,. This being the case, the apparent speed of sound at any given point, for an acoustic pulse traveling upstream along this straight line path, is given bY - while that for the downstream pulse is given by The transit times for upstream and downstream acoustic pulses (tup, tdown) are given respectively by: 11 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w and To the extent that (V, IC,)' << 1, these equations reduce to - and where Taking the difference of the reciprocal of these transit times leads to 2V, cos eo 1, [1- cosz eo ($J] - N To the extent that cos' Bo ( v,/Co)' << 1, this result reduces to ) - At cos eo tdown tup where At = tup - tdown. The above relationship is valid to the degree that the following three conditions are met: 12 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w Assuming the worst case, i.e., that velocity profile which results in the most stringent condi- tions, these inequalities reduce to: In most practical cases the middle condition is the limiting one. 13 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w APPENDIX B SELECTION GUIDELINES (This Appendix is not an integral part of ANSllASME MFC-5M-1985 and is included for information purposes only.) This Appendix is intended to assist in selecting the most appropriate ultrasonic flowmeter for a particular application. Since there are many variations and differ- ences even among the same types of flowmeters, this Appendix addresses itself only to the major differences between the types. It is suggested that the application conditions be discussed with the manufacturers prior to a decision on a particular type of flowmeter. B1 SINGLE PATH VERSUS MULTIPATH INSTRUMENTS Single path instruments are usually lower in cost than multipath instruments. They are also less complex, and therefore usually somewhat simpler to install. Multipath flowmeters can exhibit better performance than single path meters under the variable and/or nonideal velocity profile distribution conditions caused by changing Reyn- olds number, changes in friction factor, and the effects caused by upstream and downstream elbows, valves, or other sources of flow disturbance. The choice of path orientations varies among manufacturers. It can be either crossed or parallel, either chordal or diametric. Choice of the most appropriate path distribution should be made after a full discussion of the application conditions with the various manufacturers. B2 EXTERNALLY MOUNTED VERSUS INSERT-TYPE TRANSDUCERS Externally mounted transducers are the simplest to install on existing pipe and, since they do not require any extensive pipe preparation, are less expensive to install than insert systems. Since the pipe inner wall is undisturbed, there is no flow disturbance in the vicinity of the transducers. They can also be easily removed with- out requiring shutdown of the process. Since these sys- tems utilize a beam that refracts into the liquid, they may be affected by variations in the sonic properties of the liquid and the pipe. The manufacturer should be contacted to ensure that the expected application con- ditions can be handled with satisfactory performance. Insert type systems can be of two types - those using wetted transducers and those where the transducers are installed in a protective well. Where the transducer faces and protective surfaces are orthogonal to the acoustic path, these systems can offer greater immunity to changes in the sonic velocity of the liquid since refrac- tion of the beam does not take place. Since these sys- tems usually either have the transducer recessed in a cavity or protruding into the liquid beyond the pipe wall, a local flow disturbance results which may affect the meters performance. Although reportedly rare, the transducer cavity could collect debris. Those insert systems where this well is filed with a protective window result in refraction of the beam through the liquid and require either relatively constant sonic velocity or compensation in the secondary device. NOTE: If very large changes in sonic velocity occur, refaaction may cause the sonic beam to miss the opposing transduces. Insert type systems may provide greater acoustic power since they avoid the transmission loss through the pipe wall. They may also, in some cases, offer a greater signal-to-noise ratio since they avoid some of the pipe borne, self-generated noise which may affect externally installed systems. 14 Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	6	6
7.1	Appendix A: Acoustic Transit Time in a Nonuniform Fluid Velocity Field	Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	21	21
7.2	Appendix B: Selection Guidelines	Copyrighted material licensed to Stanford University by Thomson Scientific (www.techstreet.com), downloaded on Oct-05-2010 by Stanford University User. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted. Uncontrolled w	21	21
